Summer had come, and Velchaninoff, contrary to his expectations, was still
in St. Petersburg. His trip to the south of Russia had fallen through, and
there seemed no end to the business which had detained him.
This business—which was a lawsuit as to certain property—had taken a very
disagreeable aspect. Three months ago the thing had appeared to be by no
means complicated—in fact, there had seemed to be scarcely any question as
to the rights and wrongs of the matter, but all seemed to change suddenly.
“Everything else seems to have changed for the worse, too!” said
Velchaninoff to himself, over and over again.
He was employing a clever lawyer—an eminent man, and an expensive one,
too; but in his impatience and suspicion he began to interfere in the
matter himself. He read and wrote papers—all of which the lawyer put into
his waste-paper basket—_holus bolus_; called in continually at the courts
and offices, made inquiries, and confused and worried everybody concerned
in the matter; so at least the lawyer declared, and begged him for mercy’s
sake to go away to the country somewhere.
But he could not make up his mind to do so. He stayed in town and enjoyed
the dust, and the hot nights, and the closeness of the air of St.
Petersburg, things which are enough to destroy anyone’s nerves. His
lodgings were somewhere near the Great Theatre; he had lately taken them,
and did not like them. Nothing went well with him; his hypochondria
increased with each day, and he had long been a victim to that disorder.
Velchaninoff was a man who had seen a great deal of the world; he was not
quite young, thirty-eight years old—perhaps thirty-nine, or so; and all
this “old age,” as he called it, had “fallen upon him quite unawares.”
However, as he himself well understood, he had aged more in the _quality_
than in the number of the years of his life; and if his infirmities were
really creeping upon him, they must have come from within and not from
outside causes. He looked young enough still. He was a tall, stout man,
with light-brown thick hair, without a suspicion of white about it, and a
light beard that reached half way down his chest. At first sight you might
have supposed him to be of a lax, careless disposition or character, but
on studying him more closely you would have found that, on the contrary,
the man was decidedly a stickler for the proprieties of this world, and
withal brought up in the ways and graces of the very best society. His
manners were very good—free but graceful—in spite of this lately-acquired
habit of grumbling and reviling things in general. He was still full of
the most perfect, aristocratic self-confidence: probably he did not
himself suspect to how great an extent this was so, though he was a most
decidedly intelligent, I may say clever, even talented man. His open,
healthy-looking face was distinguished by an almost feminine refinement,
which quality gained him much attention from the fair sex. He had large
blue eyes—eyes which ten years ago had known well how to persuade and
attract; such clear, merry, careless eyes they had been, that they
invariably brought over to his side any person he wished to gain. Now,
when he was nearly forty years old, their ancient, kind, frank expression
had died out of them, and a certain cynicism—a cunning—an irony very
often, and yet another variety of expression, of late—an expression of
melancholy or pain, undefined but keen, had taken the place of the earlier
attractive qualities of his eyes. This expression of melancholy especially
showed itself when he was alone; and it was a strange fact that the gay,
careless, happy fellow of a couple of years ago, the man who could tell a
funny story so inimitably, should now love nothing so well as to be all
alone. He intended to throw up most of his friends—a quite unnecessary
step, in spite of his present financial difficulties. Probably his vanity
was to blame for this intention: he could not bear to see his old friends
in his present position; with his vain suspicious character it would be
most unpalatable to him.
But his vanity began to change its nature in solitude. It did not grow
less, on the contrary; but it seemed to develop into a special type of
vanity which was unlike its old self. This new vanity suffered from
entirely different causes, “_higher_ causes, if I may so express it,” he
said, “and if there really be higher and lower motives in this world.”
He defined these “higher things” as matters which he could not laugh at,
or turn to ridicule when happening in his own individual experience. Of
course it would be quite another thing with the same subjects in society;
by _himself_ he could not ridicule then; but put him among other people,
and he would be the first to tear himself from all of those secret
resolutions of his conscience made in solitude, and laugh them to scorn.
Very often, on rising from his bed in the morning, he would feel ashamed
of the thoughts and feelings which had animated him during the long
sleepless night—and his nights of late had been sleepless. He seemed
suspicious of everything and everybody, great and small, and grew
mistrustful of himself.
One fact stood out clearly, and that was that during those sleepless
nights his thoughts and opinions took huge leaps and bounds, sometimes
changing entirely from the thoughts and opinions of the daytime. This fact
struck him very forcibly; and he took occasion to consult an eminent
medical friend. He spoke in fun, but the doctor informed him that the fact
of feelings and opinions changing during meditations at night, and during
sleeplessness, was one long recognised by science; and that that was
especially the case with persons of strong thinking power, and of acute
feelings. He stated further that very often the beliefs of a whole life
are uprooted under the melancholy influence of night and inability to
sleep, and that often the most fateful resolutions are made under the same
influence; that sometimes this impressionability to the mystic influence
of the dark hours amounted to a malady, in which case measures must be
taken, the radical manner of living should be changed, diet considered, a
journey undertaken if possible, etc., etc.
Velchaninoff listened no further, but he was sure that in his own case
there was decided malady.
Very soon his morning meditations began to partake of the nature of those
of the night, but they were more bitter. Certain events of his life now
began to recur to his memory more and more vividly; they would strike him
suddenly, and without apparent reason: things which had been forgotten for
ten or fifteen years—some so long ago that he thought it miraculous that
he should have been able to recall them at all. But that was not all—for,
after all, what man who has seen any life has not hundreds of such
recollections of the past? The principal point was that all this past came
back to him now with an absolutely new light thrown upon it, and he seemed
to look at it from an entirely new and unexpected point of view. Why did
some of his acts appear to him now to be nothing better than crimes? It
was not merely in the judgment of his intellect that these things appeared
so to him now—had it been only his poor sick mind, he would not have
trusted it; but his whole being seemed to condemn him; he would curse and
even weep over these recollections of the past! If anyone had told him a
couple of years since that he would _weep_ over anything, he would have
laughed the idea to scorn.
At first he recalled the unpleasant experiences of his life: certain
failures in society, humiliations; he remembered how some designing person
had so successfully blackened his character that he was requested to cease
his visits to a certain house; how once, and not so very long ago, he had
been publicly insulted, and had not challenged the offender; how once an
epigram had been fastened to his name by some witty person, in the midst
of a party of pretty women and he had not found a reply; he remembered
several unpaid debts, and how he had most stupidly run through two very
respectable fortunes.
Then he began to recall facts belonging to a “higher” order. He remembered
that he had once insulted a poor old grey-headed clerk, and that the
latter had covered his face with his hands and cried, which Velchaninoff
had thought a great joke at the time, but now looked upon in quite another
light. Then he thought how he had once, merely for fun, set a scandal
going about the beautiful little wife of a certain schoolmaster, and how
the husband had got to hear the rumour. He (Velchaninoff) had left the
town shortly after and did not know how the matter had ended; but now he
fell to wondering and picturing to himself the possible consequences of
his action; and goodness knows where this theme would not have taken him
to if he had not suddenly recalled another picture: that of a poor girl,
whom he had been ashamed of and never thought of loving, but whom he had
betrayed and forsaken, her and her child, when he left St. Petersburg. He
had afterwards searched for this girl and her baby for a whole year, but
never found them.
Of this sort of recollections there were, alas! but too many; and each one
seemed to bring along with it a train of others. His vanity began to
suffer, little by little, under these memories. I have said that his
vanity had developed into a new type of vanity. There were moments (few
albeit) in which he was not even ashamed of having no carriage of his own,
now; or of being seen by one of his former friends in shabby clothes; or
when, if seen and looked at by such a person contemptuously, he was
high-minded enough to suppress even a frown. Of course such moments of
self-oblivion were rare; but, as I said before, his vanity began little by
little to change away from its former quarters and to centre upon one
question which was perpetually ranging itself before his intellect. “There
is some power or other,” he would muse, sarcastically, “somewhere, which
is extremely interested in my morals, and sends me these damnable
recollections and tears of remorse! Let them come, by all means; but they
have not the slightest effect on me! for I haven’t a scrap of independence
about me, in spite of my wretched forty years, I know that for certain.
Why, if it were to happen so that I should gain anything by spreading
another scandal about that schoolmaster’s wife, (for instance, that she
had accepted presents from me, or something of that sort), I should
certainly spread it without a thought.”
But though no other opportunity ever did occur of maligning the
schoolmistress, yet the very thought alone that _if_ such an opportunity
were to occur he would inevitably seize it was almost fatal to him at
times. He was not tortured with memory at every moment of his life; he had
intervals of time to breathe and rest in. But the longer he stayed, the
more unpleasant did he find his life in St. Petersburg. July came in. At
certain moments he felt inclined to throw up his lawsuit and all, and go
down to the Crimea; but after an hour or so he would despise his own idea,
and laugh at himself for entertaining it.
“These thoughts won’t be driven away by a mere journey down south,” he
said to himself, “when they have once begun to annoy me; besides, if I am
easy in my conscience now, I surely need not try to run away from any such
worrying recollections of past days!” “Why should I go after all?” he
resumed, in a strain of melancholy philosophizing; “this place is a very
heaven for a hypochondriac like myself, what with the dust and the heat,
and the discomfort of this house, what with the nonsensical swagger and
pretence of all these wretched little ‘civil servants’ in the departments
I frequent! Everyone is delightfully candid—and candour is undoubtedly
worthy of all respect! I _won’t_ go away—I’ll stay and die here rather
than go!”
It was the third of July. The heat and closeness of the air had become
quite unbearable. The day had been a busy one for Velchaninoff—he had been
walking and driving about without rest, and had still in prospect a visit
in the evening to a certain state councillor who lived somewhere on the
Chornaya Riéchka (black stream), and whom he was anxious to drop in upon
unexpectedly.
At six o’clock our hero issued from his house once more, and trudged off
to dine at a restaurant on the Nefsky, near the police-bridge—a
second-rate sort of place, but French. Here he took his usual corner, and
ordered his usual dinner, and waited.
He always had a rouble(1) dinner, and paid for his wine extra, which
moderation he looked upon as a discreet sacrifice to the temporary
financial embarrassment under which he was suffering.
He regularly went through the ceremony of wondering how he could bring
himself to eat “such nastiness,” and yet as regularly he demolished every
morsel, and with excellent show of appetite too, just as though he had
eaten nothing for three days.
“This appetite can’t be healthy!” he murmured to himself sometimes,
observing his own voracity. However, on this particular occasion, he sat
down to his dinner in a miserably bad humour: he threw his hat angrily
away somewhere, tipped his chair back,—and reflected.
He was in the sort of humour that if his next neighbour—dining at the
little table near him—were to rattle his plate, or if the boy serving him
were to make any little blunder, or, in fact, if any little petty
annoyance were to put him out of a sudden, he was quite capable of
shouting at the offender, and, in fact, of kicking up a serious row on the
smallest pretext.
Soup was served to him. He took up his spoon, and was about to commence
operations, when he suddenly threw it down again, and started from his
seat. An unexpected thought had struck him, and in an instant he had
realized why he had been plunged in gloom and mental perturbation during
the last few days. Goodness knows why he thus suddenly became inspired, as
it were, with the truth; but so it was. He jumped from his chair, and in
an instant it all stood out before him as plain as his five fingers! “It’s
all that hat!” he muttered to himself; “it’s all simply and solely that
damnable round hat, with the crape band round it; that’s the reason and
cause of all my worries these last days!”
He began to think; and the more he thought, the more dejected he became,
and the more astonishing appeared the “remarkable circumstance of the
hat.”
“But, hang it all, there _is_ no circumstance!” he growled to himself.
“What circumstance do I mean? There’s been nothing in the nature of an
event or occurrence!”
The fact of the matter was this: Nearly a fortnight since, he had met for
the first time, somewhere about the corner of the Podiacheskaya, a
gentleman with crape round his hat. There was nothing particular about the
man—he was just like all others; but as he passed Velchaninoff he had
stared at him so fixedly that it was impossible to avoid noticing him, and
more than noticing—observing him attentively.
The man’s face seemed to be familiar to Velchaninoff. He had evidently
seen him somewhere and at some time or other.
“But one sees thousands of people during one’s life,” thought
Velchaninoff; “one can’t remember every face!” So he had gone on his way,
and before he was twenty yards further, to all appearances he had
forgotten all about the meeting, in spite of the strength of the first
impression made upon him.
And yet he had _not_ forgotten; for the impression remained all day, and a
very original impression it was, too,—a kind of objectless feeling of
anger against he knew not what. He remembered his exact feelings at this
moment, a fortnight after the occurrence: how he had been puzzled by the
angry nature of his sentiments at the time, and puzzled to such an extent
that he had never for a moment connected his ill-humour with the meeting
of the morning, though he had felt as cross as possible all day. But the
gentleman with the crape band had not lost much time about reminding
Velchaninoff of his existence, for the very next day he met the latter
again, on the Nefsky Prospect and again he had stared in a peculiarly
fixed way at him.
Velchaninoff flared up and spat on the ground in irritation—Russian like,
but a moment after he was wondering at his own wrath. “There are faces,
undoubtedly,” he reflected, “which fill one with disgust at first sight;
but I certainly _have_ met that fellow somewhere or other.
“Yes, I _have_ met him before!” he muttered again, half an hour later.
And again, as on the last occasion, he was in a vile humour all that
evening, and even went so far as to have a bad dream in the night; and yet
it never entered his head to imagine that the cause of his bad temper on
both occasions had been the accidental meeting with the gentleman in
mourning, although on the second evening he had remembered and thought of
the chance encounter two or three times.
He had even flared up angrily to think that “such a dirty-looking cad”
should presume to linger in his memory so long; he would have felt it
humiliating to himself to imagine for a moment that such a wretched
creature could possibly be in any way connected with the agitated
condition of his feelings.
Two days later the pair had met once more at the landing place of one of
the small Neva ferry steamers.
On the third occasion Velchaninoff was ready to swear that the man
recognised him, and had pressed through the crowd towards him; had even
dared to stretch out his hand and call him by name. As to this last fact
he was not quite certain, however. “At all events, who the deuce _is_ he?”
thought Velchaninoff, “and why can’t the idiot come up and speak to me if
he really does recognise me; and if he so much wishes to do so?” With
these thoughts Velchaninoff had taken a droshky and started off for the
Smolney Monastery, where his lawyer lived.
Half an hour later he was engaged in his usual quarrel with that
gentleman.
But that same evening he was in a worse humour than ever, and his night
was spent in fantastic dreams and imaginings, which were anything but
pleasant. “I suppose it’s bile!” he concluded, as he paid his matutinal
visit to the looking-glass.
This was the third meeting.
Then, for five days there was not a sign of the man; and yet, much to his
distaste, Velchaninoff could not, for the life of him, avoid thinking of
the man with the crape band.
He caught himself musing over the fellow. “What have I to do with him?” he
thought. “What can his business in St. Petersburg be?—he looks busy: and
whom is he in mourning for? He clearly recognises me, but I don’t know in
the least who he is! And why do such people as he is put crape on their
hats? it doesn’t seem ’the thing’ for them, somehow! I believe I shall
recognise this fellow if I ever get a good close look at him!”
And there came over him that sensation we all know so well—the same
feeling that one has when one can’t for the life of one think of the
required word; every other word comes up; associations with the right word
come up; occasions when one has used the word come up; one wanders round
and round the immediate vicinity of the word wanted, but the actual word
itself will not appear, though you may break your head to get at it!
“Let’s see, now: it was—yes—some while since. It was—where on earth was
it? There was a—oh! devil take whatever there was or wasn’t there! What
does it matter to me?” he broke off angrily of a sudden. “I’m not going to
lower myself by thinking of a little cad like that!”
He felt very angry; but when, in the evening, he remembered that he had
been so upset, and recollected the cause of his anger, he felt the
disagreeable sensation of having been caught by someone doing something
wrong.
This fact puzzled and annoyed him.
“There must be some reason for my getting so angry at the mere
recollection of that man’s face,” he thought, but he didn’t finish
thinking it out.
But the next evening he was still more indignant; and this time, he really
thought, with good cause. “Such audacity is unparalleled!” he said to
himself.
The fact of the matter is, there had been a fourth meeting with the man of
the crape hat band. The latter had apparently arisen from the earth and
confronted him. But let me explain what had happened.
It so chanced that Velchaninoff had just met, accidentally, that very
state-councillor mentioned a few pages back, whom he had been so anxious
to see, and on whom he had intended to pounce unexpectedly at his country
house. This gentleman evidently avoided Velchaninoff, but at the same time
was most necessary to the latter in his lawsuit. Consequently, when
Velchaninoff met him, the one was delighted, while the other was very much
the reverse. Velchaninoff had immediately button-holed him, and walked
down the street with him, talking; doing his very utmost to keep the sly
old fox to the subject on which it was so necessary that he should be
pumped. And it was just at this most important moment, when Velchaninoff’s
intellect was all on the _qui vive_ to catch up the slightest hints of
what he wished to get at, while the foxy old councillor (aware of the
fact) was doing his best to reveal nothing, that the former, taking his
eyes from his companion’s face for one instant, beheld the gentleman of
the crape hatband walking along the other side of the road, and looking at
him—nay, _watching_ him, evidently—and apparently smiling!
“Devil take him!” said Velchaninoff, bursting out into fury at once, while
the “old fox” instantly disappeared, “and I should have succeeded in
another minute. Curse that dirty little hound! he’s simply spying me.
I’ll—I’ll hire somebody to—I’ll take my oath he laughed at me! D—n him,
I’ll thrash him. I wish I had a stick with me. I’ll—I’ll buy one! I won’t
leave this matter so. Who the deuce is he? I _will_ know! Who is he?”
At last, three days after this fourth encounter, we find Velchaninoff
sitting down to dinner at his restaurant, as recorded a page or two back,
in a state of mind bordering upon the furious. He could not conceal the
state of his feelings from himself, in spite of all his pride. He was
obliged to confess at last, that all his anxiety, his irritation, his
state of agitation generally, must undoubtedly be connected with, and
absolutely attributed to, the appearance of the wretched-looking creature
with the crape hatband, in spite of his insignificance.
“I may be a hypochondriac,” he reflected, “and I may be inclined to make
an elephant out of a gnat; but how does it help me? What use is it to me
if I persuade myself to believe that _perhaps_ all this is fancy? Why, if
every dirty little wretch like that is to have the power of upsetting a
man like myself, why—it’s—it’s simply unbearable!”
Undoubtedly, at this last (fifth) encounter of to-day, the elephant had
proved himself a very small gnat indeed. The “crape man” had appeared
suddenly, as usual, and had passed by Velchaninoff, but without looking up
at him this time; indeed, he had gone by with downcast eyes, and had even
seemed anxious to pass unobserved. Velchaninoff had turned rapidly round
and shouted as loud as ever he could at him.
“Hey!” he cried. “You! Crape hatband! You want to escape notice this time,
do you? Who are you?”
Both the question and the whole idea of calling after the man were
absurdly foolish, and Velchaninoff knew it the moment he had said the
words. The man had turned round, stopped for an instant, lost his head,
smiled—half made up his mind to say something,—had waited half a minute in
painful indecision, then twisted suddenly round again, and “bolted”
without a word. Velchaninoff gazed after him in amazement. “What if it be
_I_ that haunt _him_, and not he me, after all?” he thought. However,
Velchaninoff ate up his dinner, and then drove off to pounce upon the town
councillor at the latter’s house, if he could.
The councillor was not in; and he was informed that he would scarcely be
at home before three or four in the morning, because he had gone to a
“name’s-day party.”
Velchaninoff felt that this was too bad! In his rage he determined to
follow and hunt the fellow up at the party: he actually took a droshky,
and started off with that wild idea; but luckily he thought better of it
on the way, got out of the vehicle and walked away towards the “Great
Theatre,” near which he lived. He felt that he must have motion; also he
_must_ absolutely sleep well this coming night: in order to sleep he must
be tired; so he walked all the way home—a fairly long walk, and arrived
there about half-past ten, as tired as he could wish.
His lodging, which he had taken last March, and had abused ever since,
apologising to himself for living “in such a hole,” and at the same time
excusing himself for the fact by the reflection that it was only for a
while, and that he had dropped quite accidentally into St.
Petersburg—thanks to that cursed lawsuit!—his lodging, I say, was by no
means so bad as he made it out to be!
The entrance certainly was a little dark, and dirty-looking, being just
under the arch of the gateway. But he had two fine large light rooms on
the second floor, separated by the entrance hall: one of these rooms
overlooked the yard and the other the street. Leading out of the former of
these was a smaller room, meant to be used as a bedroom; but Velchaninoff
had filled it with a disordered array of books and papers, and preferred
to sleep in one of the large rooms, the one overlooking the street, to
wit.
His bed was made for him, every day, upon the large divan. The rooms were
full of good furniture, and some valuable ornaments and pictures were
scattered about, but the whole place was in dreadful disorder; the fact
being that at this time Velchaninoff was without a regular servant. His
one domestic had gone away to stay with her friends in the country; he
thought of taking a man, but decided that it was not worth while for a
short time; besides he hated flunkeys, and ended by making arrangements
with his dvornik’s sister Martha, who was to come up every morning and “do
out” his rooms, he leaving the key with her as he went out each day.
Martha did absolutely nothing towards tidying the place and robbed him
besides, but he didn’t care, he liked to be alone in the house. But
solitude is all very well within certain limits, and Velchaninoff found
that his nerves could not stand all this sort of thing at certain bilious
moments; and it so fell out that he began to loathe his room more and more
every time he entered it.
However, on this particular evening he hardly gave himself time to
undress; he threw himself on his bed, and determined that nothing should
make him think of _anything_, and that he would fall asleep at once.
And, strangely enough, his head had hardly touched the pillow before he
actually was asleep; and this was the first time for a month past that
such a thing had occurred.
He awoke at about two, considerably agitated; he had dreamed certain very
strange dreams, reminding him of the incoherent wanderings of fever.
The subject seemed to be some crime which he had committed and concealed,
but of which he was accused by a continuous flow of people who swarmed
into his rooms for the purpose. The crowd which had already collected
within was enormous, and yet they continued to pour in in such numbers
that the door was never shut for an instant.
But his whole interest seemed to centre in one strange looking
individual,—a man who seemed to have once been very closely and intimately
connected with him, but who had died long ago and now reappeared for some
reason or other.
The most tormenting part of the matter was that Velchaninoff could not
recollect who this man was,—he could not remember his name,—though he
recollected the fact that he had once dearly loved him. All the rest of
the people swarming into the room seemed to be waiting for the final word
of this man,—either the condemnation or the justification of Velchaninoff
was to be pronounced by him,—and everyone was impatiently waiting to hear
him speak.
But he sat motionless at the table, and would not open his lips to say a
word of any sort.
The uproar continued, the general annoyance increased, and, suddenly,
Velchaninoff himself strode up to the man in a fury, and smote him because
he would not speak. Velchaninoff felt the strangest satisfaction in having
thus smitten him; his heart seemed to freeze in horror for what he had
done, and in acute suffering for the crime involved in his action,—but in
that very sensation of freezing at the heart lay the sense of satisfaction
which he felt.
Exasperated more and more, he struck the man a second and a third time;
and then—in a sort of intoxication of fury and terror, which amounted to
actual insanity, and yet bore within it a germ of delightful satisfaction,
he ceased to count his blows, and rained them in without ceasing.
He felt he must destroy, annihilate, demolish all this.
Suddenly something strange happened; everyone present had given a dreadful
cry and turned expectantly towards the door, while at the same moment
there came three terrific peals of the hall-bell, so violent that it
appeared someone was anxious to pull the bell-handle out.
Velchaninoff awoke, started up in a second, and made for the door; he was
persuaded that the ring at the bell had been no dream or illusion, but
that someone had actually rung, and was at that moment standing at the
front door.
“It would be _too_ unnatural if such a clear and unmistakable ring should
turn out to be nothing but an item of a dream!” he thought. But, to his
surprise, it proved that such was nevertheless the actual state of the
case! He opened the door and went out on to the landing; he looked
downstairs and about him, but there was not a soul to be seen. The bell
hung motionless. Surprised, but pleased, he returned into his room. He lit
a candle, and suddenly remembered that he had left the door closed, but
not locked and chained. He had often returned home before this evening and
forgotten to lock the door behind him, without attaching any special
significance to the fact; his maid had often respectfully protested
against such neglect while with him. He now returned to the entrance hall
to make the door fast; before doing so he opened it, however, and had one
more look about the stairs. He then shut the door and fastened the chain
and hook, but did not take the trouble to turn the key in the lock.
Some clock struck half-past two at this moment, so that he had had three
hours’ sleep—more or less.
His dream had agitated him to such an extent that he felt unwilling to lie
down again at once; he decided to walk up and down the room two or three
times first, just long enough to smoke a cigar. Having half-dressed
himself, he went to the window, drew the heavy curtains aside and pulled
up one of the blinds, it was almost full daylight. These light summer
nights of St. Petersburg always had a bad effect upon his nerves, and of
late they had added to the causes of his sleeplessness, so that a few
weeks since he had invested in these thick curtains, which completely shut
out the light when drawn close.
Having thus let in the sunshine, quite oblivious of the lighted candle on
the table, he commenced to walk up and down the room. Still feeling the
burden of his dream upon him, its impression was even now at work upon his
mind, he still felt a painfully guilty sensation about him, caused by the
fact that he had allowed himself to raise his hand against “that man” and
strike him. “But, my dear sir!” he argued with himself, “it was not a man
at all! the whole thing was a dream! what’s the use of worrying yourself
for nothing?”
Velchaninoff now became obstinately convinced that he was a sick man, and
that to his sickly state of body was to be attributed all his perturbation
of mind. He was an invalid.
It had always been a weak point with Velchaninoff that he hated to think
of himself as growing old or infirm; and yet in his moments of anger he
loved to exaggerate one or the other in order to worry himself.
“It’s old age,” he now muttered to himself, as he paced up and down the
room. “I’m becoming an old fogey—that’s the fact of the matter! I’m losing
my memory—see ghosts, and have dreams, and hear bells ring—curse it all! I
know these dreams of old, they always herald fever with me. I dare swear
that the whole business of this man with the crape hatband has been a
dream too! I was perfectly right yesterday, he isn’t haunting me the least
bit in the world; it is I that am haunting _him_! I’ve invented a pretty
little ghost-story about him and then climb under the table in terror at
my own creation! Why do I call him a little cad, too? he may be a most
respectable individual for all I know! His face is a disagreeable one,
certainly, though there is nothing hideous about it! He dresses just like
anyone else. I don’t know—there’s something about his look—There I go
again! What the devil have I got to do with his look? what a fool I
am—just as though I could not live without the dirty little wretch—curse
him!”
Among other thoughts connected with this haunting crape-man was one which
puzzled Velchaninoff immensely; he felt convinced that at some time or
other he had known the man, and known him very intimately; and that now
the latter, when meeting him, always laughed at him because he was aware
of some great secret of his former life, or because he was amused to see
Velchaninoff’s present humiliating condition of poverty.
Mechanically our hero approached the window in order to get a breath of
fresh air—when he was suddenly seized with a violent fit of shuddering;—a
feeling came over him that something unusual and unheard-of was happening
before his very eyes.
He had not had time to open the window when something he saw caused him to
slip behind the corner of the curtain, and hide himself.
The man in the crape hatband was standing on the opposite side of the
street.
He was standing with his face turned directly towards Velchaninoff’s
window, but evidently unaware of the latter’s presence there, and was
carefully examining the house, and apparently considering some question
connected with it.
He seemed to come to a decision after a moment’s thought, and raised his
finger to his forehead; then he looked quietly about him, and ran swiftly
across the road on tiptoe. He reached the gate, and entered it; this gate
was often left open on summer nights until two or three in the morning.
“He’s coming to me,” muttered Velchaninoff, and with equal caution he left
the window, and ran to the front door; arrived in the hall, he stood in
breathless expectation before the door, and placed his trembling hand
carefully upon the hook which he had fastened a few minutes since, and
stood listening for the tread of the expected footfall on the stairs. His
heart was beating so loud that he was afraid he might miss the sound of
the cautious steps approaching.
He could understand nothing of what was happening, but it seemed clear
that his dream was about to be realised.
Velchaninoff was naturally brave. He loved risk for its own sake, and very
often ran into useless dangers, with no one by to see, to please himself.
But this was different, somehow; he was not himself, and yet he was as
brave as ever, but with something added. He made out every movement of the
stranger from behind his own door.
“Ah!—there he comes!—he’s on the steps now!—here he comes!—he’s up
now!—now he’s looking down stairs and all about, and crouching down! Aha!
there’s his hand on the door-handle—he’s trying it!—he thought he would
find it unlocked!—then he must know that I _do_ leave it unlocked
sometimes!—He’s trying it again!—I suppose he thinks the hook may slip!—he
doesn’t care to go away without doing anything!”
So ran Velchaninoff’s thoughts, and so indeed followed the man’s actions.
There was no doubt about it, someone was certainly standing outside and
trying the door-handle, carefully and cautiously pulling at the door
itself, and, in fact, endeavouring to effect an entrance; equally sure was
it that the person so doing must have his own object in trying to sneak
into another man’s house at dead of night. But Velchaninoff’s plan of
action was laid, and he awaited the proper moment; he was anxious to seize
a good opportunity—slip the hook and chain—open the door wide, suddenly,
and stand face to face with this bugbear, and then ask him what the deuce
he wanted there.
No sooner devised than executed.
Awaiting the proper moment, Velchaninoff suddenly slipped the hook, pushed
the door wide, and almost tumbled over the man with the crape hatband!
The crape-man stood rooted to the spot dumb with astonishment.
Both men stood opposite one another on the landing, and both stared in
each other’s eyes, silent and motionless.
So passed a few moments, and suddenly, like a flash of lightning,
Velchaninoff became aware of the identity of his guest.
At the same moment the latter seemed to guess that Velchaninoff had
recognised him. Velchaninoff could see it in his eyes. In one instant the
visitor’s whole face was all ablaze with its very sweetest of smiles.
“Surely I have the pleasure of speaking to Aleksey Ivanovitch?” he asked,
in the most dulcet of voices, comically inappropriate to the circumstances
of the case.
“Surely you are Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky?” asked Velchaninoff, in
return, after a pause, and with an expression of much perplexity.
“I had the pleasure of your acquaintance ten years ago at T——, and, if I
may remind you of the fact, we were almost intimate friends.”
“Quite so—oh yes! but it is now three o’clock in the morning, and you have
been trying my lock for the last ten minutes.”
“Three o’clock!” cried the visitor, looking at his watch with an air of
melancholy surprise.
“Why, so it is! dear me—three o’clock! forgive me, Aleksey Ivanovitch! I
ought to have found it out before thinking of paying you a visit. I will
do myself the honour of calling to explain another day, and now I—.”
“Oh no;—no, no! If you are to explain at all let’s have it at once; this
moment!” interrupted Velchaninoff warmly. “Kindly step in here, into the
room! You must have meant to come in, you know; you didn’t come here at
night, like this, simply for the pleasure of trying my lock?”
He felt excited, and at the same time was conscious of a sort of timidity;
he could not collect his thoughts. He was ashamed of himself for it. There
was no danger, no mystery about the business, nothing but the silly figure
of Pavel Pavlovitch.
And yet he could not feel satisfied that there was nothing particular in
it; he felt afraid of something to come, he knew not what or when.
However, he made the man enter, seated him in a chair, and himself sat
down on the side of his bed, a yard or so off, and rested his elbows on
his knees while he quietly waited for the other to begin. He felt
irritated; he stared at his visitor and let his thoughts run. Strangely
enough, the other never opened his mouth; he seemed to be entirely
oblivious of the fact that it was his duty to speak. Nay, he was even
looking enquiringly at Velchaninoff as though quite expecting that the
latter would speak to _him_!
Perhaps he felt a little uncomfortable at first, somewhat as a mouse must
feel when he finds himself unexpectedly in the trap.
Velchaninoff very soon lost his patience.
“Well?” he cried, “you are not a fantasy or a dream or anything of that
kind, are you? You aren’t a corpse, are you? Come, my friend, this is not
a game or play. I want your explanation, please!”
The visitor fidgeted about a little, smiled, and began to speak
cautiously.
“So far as I can see,” he said, “the time of night of my visit is what
surprises you, and that I should have come as I did; in fact, when I
remember the past, and our intimacy, and all that, I am astonished myself;
but the fact is, I did not mean to come in at all, and if I did so it was
purely an accident.”
“An accident! Why, I saw you creeping across the road on tip-toes!”
“You saw me? Indeed! Come, then you know as much or more about the matter
than I do; but I see I am annoying you. This is how it was: I’ve been in
town three weeks or so on business. I am Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky, you
recognized me yourself, my business in town is to effect an exchange of
departments. I am trying for a situation in another place—one with a large
increase of salary; but all this is beside the point; the fact of the
matter is, I believe I have been delaying my business on purpose. I
believe if everything were settled at this moment I should still be
dawdling in this St. Petersburg of yours in my present condition of mind.
I go wandering about as though I had lost all interest in things, and were
rather glad of the fact, in my present condition of mind.”
“What condition of mind?” asked Velchaninoff, frowning.
The visitor raised his eyes to Velchaninoff’s, lifted his hat from the
ground beside him, and with great dignity pointed out the black crape
band.
“There, sir, in _that_ condition of mind!” he observed.
Velchaninoff stared stupidly at the crape, and thence at the man’s face.
Suddenly his face flushed up in a hot blush for a moment, and he was
violently agitated.
“Not Natalia Vasilievna, surely?”
“Yes, Natalia Vasilievna! Last March! Consumption, sir, and almost
suddenly—all over in two or three months—and here am I left as you see
me!”
So saying, Pavel Pavlovitch, with much show of feeling, bent his bald head
down and kept it bent for some ten seconds, while he held out his two
hands, in one of which was the hat with the band, in explanatory emotion.
This gesture, and the man’s whole air, seemed to brighten Velchaninoff up;
he smiled sarcastically for one instant, not more at present, for the news
of this lady’s death (he had known her so long ago, and had forgotten her
many a year since) had made a quite unexpected impression upon his mind.
“Is it possible!” he muttered, using the first words that came to his
lips, “and pray why did you not come here and tell me at once?”
“Thanks for your kind interest, I see and value it, in spite of——”
“In spite of what?”
“In spite of so many years of separation you at once sympathised with my
sorrow—and in fact with myself, and so fully too—that I feel naturally
grateful. That’s all I had to tell you, sir! Don’t suppose I doubt my
friends, you know; why, even here, in this place, I could put my finger on
several very sincere friends indeed (for instance, Stepan Michailovitch
Bagantoff); but remember, my dear Aleksey Ivanovitch—nine years have
passed since we were acquaintances—or friends, if you’ll allow me to say
so—and meanwhile you have never been to see us, never written.”
The guest sang all this out as though he were reading it from music, but
kept his eyes fixed on the ground the while, although, of course, he saw
what was going on above his eyelashes exceedingly well all the same.
Velchaninoff had found his head by this time.
With a strange sort of fascinated attention, which strengthened itself
every moment, he continued to gaze at and listen to Pavel Pavlovitch, and
of a sudden, when the latter stopped speaking, a flood of curious ideas
swept unexpectedly through his brain.
“But look here,” he cried, “how is it that I never recognized you all this
while?—we’ve met five times, at least, in the streets!”
“Quite so—I am perfectly aware of the circumstance. You chanced to meet me
two or three times, and——”
“No, no! _you_ met _me_, you know—not I you!” Velchaninoff suddenly burst
into a roar of laughter, and rose from his seat. Pavel Pavlovitch paused a
moment, looked keenly at Velchaninoff, and then continued:
“As to your not recognizing me, in the first place you might easily have
forgotten me by now; and besides, I have had small-pox since last we met,
and I daresay my face is a good deal marked.”
“Smallpox? why, how did you manage that?—he has had it, though, by Jove!”
cried Velchaninoff. “What a funny fellow you are—however, go on, don’t
stop.”
Velchaninoff’s spirits were rising higher and higher; he was beginning to
feel wonderfully light-hearted. That feeling of agitation which had lately
so disturbed him had given place to quite a different sentiment. He now
began to stride up and down the room, very quickly.
“I was going to say,” resumed Pavel Pavlovitch, “that though I have met
you several times, and though I quite intended to come and look you up,
when I was arranging my visit to Petersburg, still, I was in that
condition of mind, you know, and my wits have so suffered since last
March, that——”
“Wits since last March,—yes, go on: wait a minute—do you smoke?”
“Oh—you know, Natalia Vasilievna, never—”
“Quite so; but since March—eh?”
“Well—I might, a cigarette or so.”
“Here you are, then! Light up and go on,—go on! you interest me
wonderfully.”
Velchaninoff lit a cigar and sat down on his bed again. Pavel Pavlovitch
paused a moment.
“But what a state of agitation you seem to be in yourself!” said he, “are
you quite well?”
“Oh, curse my health!” cried Velchaninoff,—“you go on!”
The visitor observed his host’s agitation with satisfaction; he went on
with his share of the talking with more confidence.
“What am I to go on about?” he asked. “Imagine me, Alexey Ivanovitch—a
broken man,—not simply broken, but gone at the root, as it were; a man
forced to change his whole manner of living, after twenty years of married
life, wandering about the dusty roads without an object,—mind lost—almost
oblivious of his own self,—and yet, as it were, taking some sort of
intoxicated delight in his loneliness! Isn’t it natural that if I should,
at such a moment of self-forgetfulness come across a friend—even a _dear_
friend, I might prefer to avoid him for that moment? and isn’t it equally
natural that at another moment I should long to see and speak with some
one who has been an eye-witness of, or a partaker, so to speak, in my
never-to-be-recalled past? and to rush—not only in the day, but at night,
if it so happens,—to rush to the embrace of such a man?—yes, even if one
has to wake him up at three in the morning to do it! I was wrong in my
time, not in my estimate of my friend, though, for at this moment I feel
the full rapture of success; my rash action has been successful: I have
found sympathy! As for the time of night, I confess I thought it was not
twelve yet! You see, one sups of grief, and it intoxicates one,—at least,
not grief, exactly, it’s more the condition of mind—the new state of
things that affects me.”
“Dear me, how oddly you express yourself!” said Velchaninoff, rising from
his seat once more, and becoming quite serious again.
“Oddly, do I? Perhaps.”
“Look here: are you joking?”
“Joking!” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, in shocked surprise; “_joking_—at the
very moment when I am telling you of——”
“Oh—be quiet about that! for goodness sake.”
Velchaninoff started off on his journey up and down the room again.
So matters stood for five minutes or so: the visitor seemed inclined to
rise from his chair, but Velchaninoff bade him sit still, and Pavel
Pavlovitch obediently flopped into his seat again.
“How changed you are!” said the host at last, stopping in front of the
other chair, as though suddenly struck with the idea; “fearfully changed!”
“Wonderful! you’re quite another man!”
“That’s hardly surprising! _nine_ years, sir!”
“No, no, no! years have nothing to do with it! it’s not in appearance you
are so changed: it’s something else!”
“Well, sir, the nine years might account for anything.”
“Perhaps it’s only since March, eh?”
“Ha-ha! you are playful, sir,” said Pavel Pavlovitch, laughing slyly.
“But, if I may ask it, wherein am I so changed?”
“Oh—why, you used to be such a staid, sober, correct Pavel Pavlovitch;
such a wise Pavel Pavlovitch; and now you’re a good-for-nothing sort of
Pavel Pavlovitch.”
Velchaninoff was in that state of irritation when the steadiest, gravest
people will sometimes say rather more than they mean.
“Good-for-nothing, am I? and _wise_ no longer, I suppose, eh?” chuckled
Pavel Pavlovitch, with disagreeable satisfaction.
“Wise, indeed! My dear sir, I’m afraid you are not sober,” replied
Velchaninoff; and added to himself, “I am pretty fairly insolent myself,
but I can’t compare with this little cad! And what on earth is the fellow
driving at?”
“Oh, my dear, good, my best of Alexey Ivanovitches,” said the visitor
suddenly, most excitedly, and twisting about on his chair, “and why
_should_ I be sober? We are not moving in the brilliant walks of
society—you and I—just now. We are but two dear old friends come together
in the full sincerity of perfect love, to recall and talk over that sweet
mutual tie of which the dear departed formed so treasured a link in our
friendship.”
So saying, the sensitive gentleman became so carried away by his feelings
that he bent his head down once more, to hide his emotion, and buried his
face in his hat.
Velchaninoff looked on with an uncomfortable feeling of disgust.
“I can’t help thinking the man is simply silly,” he thought; “and yet—no,
no—his face is so red he must be drunk. But drunk or not drunk, what does
the little wretch want with me? That’s the puzzle.”
“Do you remember—oh, _don’t_ you remember—our delightful little
evenings—dancing sometimes, or sometimes literary—at Simeon
Simeonovitch’s?” continued the visitor, gradually removing his hat from
before his face, and apparently growing more and more enthusiastic over
the memories of the past, “and our little readings—you and she and
myself—and our first meeting, when you came in to ask for information
about something connected with your business in the town, and commenced
shouting angrily at me; don’t you remember—when suddenly in came Natalia
Vasilievna, and within ten minutes you were our dear friend, and so
remained for exactly a year? Just like Turgenieff’s story ‘The
Provincialka!’ ”
Velchaninoff had continued his walk up and down the room during this
_tirade_, with his eyes on the ground, listening impatiently and with
disgust—but listening _hard_, all the same.
“It never struck me to think of ’The Provincialka’ in connection with the
matter,” he interrupted. “And look here, why do you talk in that sneaking,
whining sort of voice? You never used to do that. Your whole manner is
unlike yourself.”
“Quite so, quite so. I used to be more silent, I know. I used to love to
listen while others talked. You remember how well the dear departed
talked—the wit and grace of her conversation. As to The Provincialka, I
remember she and I used often to compare your friendship for us to certain
episodes in that piece, and especially to the doings of one Stupendief. It
really was remarkably like that character and his doings.”
“What Stupendief do you mean, confound it all?” cried Velchaninoff,
stamping his foot with rage. The name seemed to have evoked certain most
irritating thoughts in his mind.
“Why, Stupendief, don’t you know, the ‘husband’ in ‘Provincialka,’ ”
whined Pavel Pavlovitch, in the very sweetest of tones; “but that belongs
to another set of fond memories—after you departed, in fact, when Mr.
Bagantoff had honoured us with his friendship, just as you had done before
him, only that his lasted five whole years.”
“Bagantoff? What Bagantoff? Do you mean that same Bagantoff who was
serving down in your town? Why, he also——”
“Yes, yes! quite so. He also, he also!” cried the enthusiastic Pavel
Pavlovitch, seizing upon Velchaninoff’s accidental slip. “Of course! So
that there you are—there’s the whole company. Bagantoff played the
‘count,’ the dear departed was the ‘Provincialka,’ and I was the
‘husband,’ only that the part was taken away from me, for incapacity, I
suppose!”
“Yes; fancy _you_ a Stupendief. You’re a—you’re first a Pavel Pavlovitch
Trusotsky!” said Velchaninoff, contemptuously, and very unceremoniously.
“But look here! Bagantoff is in town; I know he is, for I have seen him.
Why don’t you go to see _him_ as well as myself?”
“My dear sir, I’ve been there every day for the last three weeks. He won’t
receive me; he’s ill, and can’t receive! And, do you know, I have found
out that he really is very ill! Fancy my feelings—a five-year’s friend!
Oh, my dear Alexey Ivanovitch! you don’t know what my feelings are in my
present condition of mind. I assure you, at one moment I long for the
earth to open and swallow me up, and the next I feel that I _must_ find
one of those old friends, eyewitnesses of the past, as it were, if only to
weep on his bosom, only to weep, sir—give you my word.”
“Well, that’s about enough for to-night; don’t you think so?” said
Velchaninoff, cuttingly.
“Oh, too—too much!” cried the other, rising. “It must be four o’clock; and
here am I agitating your feelings in the most selfish way.”
“Now, look here; I shall call upon you myself, and I hope that you will
then——but, tell me honestly, are you drunk to-night?”
“Drunk! not the least in the world!”
“Did you drink nothing before you came here, or earlier?”
“Do you know, my dear Alexey Ivanovitch, you are quite in a high fever!”
“Good-night. I shall call to-morrow.”
“And I have noticed it all the evening, really quite delirious!” continued
Pavel Pavlovitch, licking his lips, as it were, with satisfaction as he
pursued this theme. “I am really quite ashamed that I should have allowed
myself to be so awkward as to agitate you. Well, well; I’m going! Now you
must lie down at once and go to sleep.”
“You haven’t told me where you live,” shouted Velchaninoff after him as he
left the room.
“Oh, didn’t I? Pokrofsky Hotel.”
Pavel Pavlovitch was out on the stairs now.
“Stop!” cried Velchaninoff, once more. “You are not ‘running away,’ are
you?”
“How do you mean, ‘running away?’ ” asked Pavel Pavlovitch, turning round
at the third step, and grinning back at him, with his eyes staring very
wide open.
Instead of replying, Velchaninoff banged the door fiercely, locked and
bolted it, and went fuming back into his room. Arrived there, he spat on
the ground, as though to get rid of the taste of something loathsome.
He then stood motionless for at least five minutes, in the centre of the
room; after which he threw himself upon his bed, and fell asleep in an
instant.
The forgotten candle burned itself out in its socket.
Velchaninoff slept soundly until half-past nine, at which hour he started
up, sat down on the side of his bed, and began to think.
His thoughts quickly fixed themselves upon the death of “that woman.”
The agitating impression wrought upon his mind by yesterday’s news as to
her death had left a painful feeling of mental perturbation.
This morning the whole of the events of nine years back stood out before
his mind’s eye with extraordinary distinctness.
He had loved this woman, Natalia Vasilievna—Trusotsky’s wife,—he had loved
her, and had acted the part of her lover during the time which he had
spent in their provincial town (while engaged in business connected with a
legacy); he had lived there a whole year, though his business did not
require by any means so long a visit; in fact, the tie above mentioned had
detained him in the place.
He had been so completely under the influence of this passion, that
Natalia Vasilievna had held him in a species of slavery. He would have
obeyed the slightest whim or the wildest caprice of the woman, at that
time. He had never, before or since, experienced anything approaching to
the infatuation she had caused.
When the time came for departing, Velchaninoff had been in a state of such
absolute despair, though the parting was to have been but a short one,
that he had begged Natalia Vasilievna to leave all and fly across the
frontier with him; and it was only by laughing him out of the idea (though
she had at first encouraged it herself, probably for a joke), and by
unmercifully chaffing him, that the lady eventually persuaded Velchaninoff
to depart alone.
However, he had not been a couple of months in St. Petersburg before he
found himself asking himself that question which he had never to this day
been able to answer satisfactorily, namely, “_Did_ he love this woman at
all, or was it nothing but the infatuation of the moment?” He did not ask
this question because he was conscious of any new passion taking root in
his heart; on the contrary, during those first two months in town he had
been in that condition of mind that he had not so much as looked at a
woman, though he had met hundreds, and had returned to his old society
ways at once. And yet he knew perfectly well that if he were to return to
T—— he would instantly fall into the meshes of his passion for Natalia
Vasilievna once more, in spite of the question which he could not answer
as to the reality of his love for her.
Five years later he was as convinced of this fact as ever, although the
very thought of it was detestable to him, and although he did not remember
the name of Natalia Vasilievna but with loathing.
He was ashamed of that episode at T——. He could not understand how he
(Velchaninoff) could ever have allowed himself to become the victim of
such a stupid passion. He blushed whenever he thought of the shameful
business—blushed, and even wept for shame.
He managed to forget his remorse after a few more years—he felt sure that
he had “lived it down;” and yet now, after nine years, here was the whole
thing resuscitated by the news of Natalia’s death.
At all events, however, now, as he sat on his bed with agitating thoughts
swarming through his brain, he could not but feel that the fact of her
being dead was a consolation, amidst all the painful reflections which the
mention of her name had called up.
“Surely I am a little sorry for her?” he asked himself.
Well, he certainly did not feel that sensation of hatred for her now; he
could think of her and judge her now without passion of any kind, and
therefore more justly.
He had long since been of opinion that in all probability there had been
nothing more in Natalia Vasilievna than is to be found in every lady of
good provincial society, and that he himself had created the whole
“fantasy” of his worship and her worshipfulness; but though he had formed
this opinion, he always doubted its correctness, and he still felt that
doubt now. Facts existed to contradict the theory. For instance, this
Bagantoff had lived for several years at T——, and had been no less a
victim to passion for this woman, and had been as helpless as Velchaninoff
himself under her witchery. Bagantoff, though a young idiot (as
Velchaninoff expressed it), was nevertheless a scion of the very highest
society in St. Petersburg. His career was in St. Petersburg, and it was
significant that such a man should have wasted five important years of his
life at T—— simply out of love for this woman. It was said that he had
only returned to Petersburg even then because the lady had had enough of
him; so that, all things considered, there must have been something which
rendered Natalia Vasilievna preeminently attractive among women.
Yet the woman was not rich; she was not even pretty (if not absolutely
_plain_!) Velchaninoff had known her when she was twenty-eight years old.
Her face was capable of taking a pleasing expression, but her eyes were
not good—they were too hard. She was a thin, bony woman to look at. Her
mind was intelligent, but narrow and one-sided. She had tact and taste,
especially as to dress. Her character was firm and overbearing. She was
never wrong (in her own opinion) or unjust. The unfaithfulness towards her
husband never caused her the slightest remorse; she hated corruption, and
yet she was herself corrupt; and she believed in herself absolutely.
Nothing could ever have persuaded her that she herself was actually
depraved; Velchaninoff believed that she really did not know that her own
corruption was corrupt. He considered her to be “one of those women who
only exist to be unfaithful wives.” Such women never remain unmarried,—it
is the law of their nature to marry,—their husband is their first lover,
and he is always to blame for anything that may happen afterwards; the
unfaithful wife herself being invariably _absolutely_ in the right, and of
course perfectly innocent.
So thought Velchaninoff; and he was convinced that such a type of woman
actually existed; but he was no less convinced that there also existed a
corresponding type of men, born to be the husbands of such women. In his
opinion the mission of such men was to be, so to speak, “permanent
husbands,”—that is, to be husbands all their lives, and nothing else.
Velchaninoff had not the smallest doubt as to the existence of these two
types, and Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky was, in his opinion, an excellent
representative of the male type. Of course, the Pavel Pavlovitch of last
night was by no means the same Pavel Pavlovitch as he had known at T——. He
had found an extraordinary change in the man; and yet, on reflection, he
was bound to admit that the change was but natural, for that he could only
have remained what he was so long as his wife lived; and that now he was
but a part of a whole, allowed to wander at will—that is, an imperfect
being, a surprising, an incomprehensible sort of a _thing_, without proper
balance.
As for the Pavel Pavlovitch of T——, this is what Velchaninoff remembered
of him:
Pavel Pavlovitch had been a husband, of course,—a formality,—and that was
all. If, for instance, he was a clerk of department besides, he was so
merely in his capacity of, and as a part of his responsibility as—a
husband. He worked for his wife, and for her social position. He had been
thirty-five years old at that time, and was possessed of some considerable
property. He had not shown any special talent, nor, on the other hand, any
marked incapacity in his professional employment; his position had been
decidedly a good one.
Natalia Vasilievna had been respected and looked up to by all; not that
she valued their respect in the least,—she considered it merely as her
due. She was a good hostess, and had schooled Pavel Pavlovitch into polite
manners, so that he was able to receive and entertain the very best
society passably well.
He might be a clever man, for all Velchaninoff knew, but as Natalia
Vasilievna did not like her husband to talk much, there was little
opportunity of judging. He may have had many good qualities, as well as
bad; but the good ones were, so to speak, kept put away in their cases,
and the bad ones were stifled and not allowed to appear. Velchaninoff
remembered, for instance, that Pavel Pavlovitch had once or twice shown a
disposition to laugh at those about him, but this unworthy proclivity had
been very promptly subdued. He had been fond of telling stories, but this
was not allowed either; or, if permitted at all, the anecdote was to be of
the shortest and most uninteresting description.
Pavel Pavlovitch had a circle of private friends outside the house, with
whom he was fain, at times, to taste the flowing bowl; but this vicious
tendency was radically stamped out as soon as possible.
And yet, with all this, Natalia Vasilievna appeared, to the uninitiated,
to be the most obedient of wives, and doubtless considered herself so.
Pavel Pavlovitch may have been desperately in love with her,—no one could
say as to this.
Velchaninoff had frequently asked himself during his life at T——, whether
Pavel Pavlovitch ever suspected his wife of having formed the tie with
himself, of which mention has been made. Velchaninoff had several times
questioned Natalia Vasilievna on this point, seriously enough; but had
invariably been told, with some show of annoyance, that her husband
neither did know, nor ever could know; and that “all there might be to
know was not his business!”
Another trait in her character was that she never laughed at Pavel
Pavlovitch, and never found him funny in any sense; and that she would
have been down on any person who dared to be rude to him, at once!
Pavel Pavlovitch’s reference to the pleasant little readings enjoyed by
the trio nine years ago was accurate; they used to read Dickens’ novels
together. Velchaninoff or Trusotsky reading aloud, while Natalia
Vasilievna worked. The life at T—— had ended suddenly, and so far as
Velchaninoff was concerned, in a way which drove him almost to the verge
of madness. The fact is, he was simply turned out—although it was all
managed in such a way that he never observed that he was being thrown over
like an old worn-out shoe.
A young artillery officer had appeared in the town a month or so before
Velchaninoff’s departure and had made acquaintance with the Trusotsky’s.
The trio became a quartet. Before long Velchaninoff was informed that for
many reasons a separation was absolutely necessary; Natalia Vasilievna
adduced a hundred excellent reasons why this had become unavoidable—and
especially one which quite settled the matter. After his stormy attempt to
persuade Natalia Vasilievna to fly with him to Paris—or
anywhere,—Velchaninoff had ended by going to St. Petersburg alone—for two
or three months at the _very most_, as he said,—otherwise he would refuse
to go at all, in spite of every reason and argument Natalia might adduce.
Exactly two months later Velchaninoff had received a letter from Natalia
Vasilievna, begging him to come no more to T——, because that she already
loved another. As to the principal reason which she had brought forward in
favour of his immediate departure, she now informed him that she had made
a mistake. Velchaninoff remembered the young artilleryman, and
understood,—and so the matter had ended, once and for all. A year or two
after this Bagantoff appeared at T——, and an intimacy between Natalia
Vasilievna and the former had sprung up which lasted for five years. This
long period of constancy, Velchaninoff attributed to advancing age on the
part of Natalia. He sat on the side of his bed for nearly an hour and
thought. At last he roused himself, rang for Mavra and his coffee, drank
it off quickly—dressed—and punctually at eleven was on his way to the
Pokrofsky Hotel: he felt rather ashamed of his behaviour to Pavel
Pavlovitch last night. Velchaninoff put down all that phantasmagoria of
the trying of the lock and so on to Pavel Pavlovitch’s drunken condition
and to other reasons,—but he did not know why he was now on his way to
make fresh relations with the husband of that woman, since their
acquaintanceship and intercourse had come to so natural and simple a
termination; yet something seemed to draw him thither—some strong current
of impulse,—and he went.
Pavel Pavlovitch was not thinking of “running away,” and goodness knows
why Velchaninoff should have asked him such a question last night—he did
not know himself why he had said it!
He was directed to the Petrofsky Hotel, and found the building at once. At
the hotel he was told that Pavel Pavlovitch had now engaged a furnished
lodging in the back part of the same house.
Mounting the dirty and narrow stairs indicated, as far as the third
storey, he suddenly became aware of someone crying. It sounded like the
weeping of a child of some seven or eight years of age; it was a bitter,
but a more or less suppressed sort of crying, and with it came the sound
of a grown man’s voice, apparently trying to quiet the child—anxious that
its sobbing and crying should not be heard,—and yet only succeeding in
making it cry the louder.
The man’s voice did not seem in any way sympathetic with the child’s
grief; and the latter appeared to be begging for forgiveness.
Making his way into a narrow dark passage with two doors on each side of
it, Velchaninoff met a stout-looking, elderly woman, in very careless
morning attire, and inquired for Pavel Pavlovitch.
She tapped the door with her fingers in response to his inquiry—the same
door, apparently, whence issued the noises just mentioned. Her fat face
seemed to flush with indignation as she did so.
“He appears to be amusing himself in there!” she said, and proceeded
downstairs.
Velchaninoff was about to knock, but thought better of it and opened the
door without ceremony.
In the very middle of a room furnished with plain, but abundant furniture,
stood Pavel Pavlovitch in his shirt-sleeves, very red in the face, trying
to persuade a little girl to do something or other, and using cries and
gestures, and what looked to Velchaninoff very like kicks, in order to
effect his purpose. The child appeared to be some seven or eight years of
age, and was poorly dressed in a short black stuff frock. She seemed to be
in a most hysterical condition, crying and stretching out her arms to
Pavel Pavlovitch, as though begging and entreating him to allow her to do
whatever it might be she desired.
On Velchaninoff’s appearance the scene changed in an instant. No sooner
did her eyes fall on the visitor than the child made for the door of the
next room, with a cry of alarm; while Pavel Pavlovitch—thrown out for one
little instant—immediately relaxed into smiles of great sweetness—exactly
as he had done last night, when Velchaninoff suddenly opened his front
door and caught him standing outside.
“Alexey Ivanovitch!” he cried in real surprise; “who ever would have
thought it! Sit down—sit down—take the sofa—or this chair,—sit down, my
dear sir! I’ll just put on——” and he rushed for his coat and threw it on,
leaving his waistcoat behind.
“Don’t stand on ceremony with me,” said Velchaninoff sitting down; “stay
as you are!”
“No, sir, no! excuse me—I insist upon standing on ceremony. There, now!
I’m a little more respectable! Dear me, now, who ever would have thought
of seeing _you_ here!—not I, for one!”
Pavel Pavlovitch sat down on the edge of a chair, which he turned so as to
face Velchaninoff.
“And pray _why_ shouldn’t you have expected me? I told you last night that
I was coming this morning!”
“I thought you wouldn’t come, sir—I did indeed; in fact, when I thought
over yesterday’s visit, I despaired of ever seeing you again: I did
indeed, sir!”
Velchaninoff glanced round the room meanwhile. The place was very untidy;
the bed was unmade; the clothes thrown about the floor; on the table were
two coffee tumblers with the dregs of coffee still in them, and a bottle
of champagne half finished, and with a tumbler standing alongside it. He
glanced at the next room, but all was quiet there; the little girl had
hidden herself, and was as still as a mouse.
“You don’t mean to say you drink that stuff at this time of day?” he
asked, indicating the champagne bottle.
“It’s only a remnant,” explained Pavel Pavlovitch, a little confused.
“My word! You _are_ a changed man!”
“Bad habits, sir; and all of a sudden. All dating from that time, sir.
Give you my word, I couldn’t resist it. But I’m all right now—I’m not
drunk—I shan’t talk twaddle as I did last night; don’t be afraid sir, it’s
all right! From that very day, sir; give you my word it is! And if anyone
had told me half a year ago that I should become like this,—if they had
shown me my face in a glass then as I should be _now_, I should have given
them the lie, sir; I should indeed!”
“Hem! Then you _were_ drunk last night?”
“Yes—I was!” admitted Pavel Pavlovitch, a little guiltily—“not exactly
_drunk_, a little _beyond_ drunk!—I tell you this by way of explanation,
because I’m always worse _after_ being drunk! If I’m only a little drunk,
still the violence and unreasonableness of intoxication come out
afterwards, and stay out too; and then I feel my grief the more keenly. I
daresay my grief is responsible for my drinking. I am capable of making an
awful fool of myself and offending people when I’m drunk. I daresay I
seemed strange enough to you last night?”
“Don’t you remember what you said and did?”
“Assuredly I do—I remember everything!”
“Listen to me, Pavel Pavlovitch: I have thought it over and have come to
very much the same conclusion as you did yourself,” began Velchaninoff
gently; “besides—I believe I was a little too irritable towards you last
night—too impatient,—I admit it gladly; the fact is—I am not very well
sometimes, and your sudden arrival, you know, in the middle of the
night——”
“In the middle of the night: you are quite right—it was!” said Pavel
Pavlovitch, wagging his head assentingly; “how in the world could I have
brought myself to do such a thing? I shouldn’t have come in, though, if
you hadn’t opened the door. I should have gone as I came. I called on you
about a week ago, and did not find you at home, and I daresay I should
never have called again; for I am rather proud—Alexey Ivanovitch—in spite
of my present state. Whenever I have met you in the streets I have always
said to myself, ‘What if he doesn’t know me and rejects me—nine years is
no joke!’ and I did not dare try you for fear of being snubbed. Yesterday,
thanks to that sort of thing, you know,” (he pointed to the bottle), “I
didn’t know what time it was, and—it’s lucky you are the kind of man you
are, Alexey Ivanovitch, or I should despair of preserving your
acquaintance, after yesterday! You remember old times, Alexey Ivanovitch!”
Velchaninoff listened keenly to all this. The man seemed to be talking
seriously enough, and even with some dignity; and yet he had not believed
a single word that Pavel Pavlovitch had uttered from the very first moment
that he entered the room.
“Tell me, Pavel Pavlovitch,” said Velchaninoff at last, “—I see you are
not quite alone here,—whose little girl is that I saw when I came in?”
Pavel Pavlovitch looked surprised and raised his eyebrow; but he gazed
back at Velchaninoff with candour and apparent amiability:
“Whose little girl? Why that’s our Liza!” he said, smiling affably.
“What Liza?” asked Velchaninoff,—and something seemed to cause him to
shudder inwardly.
The sensation was dreadfully sudden. Just now, on entering the room and
seeing Liza, he had felt surprised more or less,—but had not been
conscious of the slightest feeling of presentiment,—indeed he had had no
special thought about the matter, at the moment.
“Why—_our_ Liza!—our daughter Liza!” repeated Pavel Pavlovitch, smiling.
“Your daughter? Do you mean to say that you and Natalia Vasilievna had
children?” asked Velchaninoff timidly, and in a very low tone of voice
indeed!
“Of course—but—what a fool I am—how in the world should _you_ know!
Providence sent us the gift after you had gone!”
Pavel Pavlovitch jumped off his chair in apparently pleasurable
excitement.
“I heard nothing of it!” said Velchaninoff, looking very pale.
“How should you? how should you?” repeated Pavel Pavlovitch with ineffable
sweetness. “We had quite lost hope of any children—as you may
remember,—when suddenly Heaven sent us this little one. And, oh! my
feelings—Heaven alone knows what I felt! Just a year after you went, I
think—no, wait a bit—not a year by a long way!—Let’s see, you left us in
October, or November, didn’t you?”
“I left T—— on the twelfth of September, I remember well.”
“Hum! September was it? Dear me! Well, then, let’s see—September, October,
November, December, January, February, March, April—to the 8th of May—that
was Liza’s birthday—eight months all but a bit; and if you could only have
seen the dear departed, how rejoiced——”
“Show her to me—call her in!” the words seemed to tear themselves from
Velchaninoff, whether he liked it or no.
“Certainly—this moment!” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, forgetting that he had
not finished his previous sentence, or ignoring the fact; and he hastily
left the room, and entered the small chamber adjoining.
Three or four minutes passed by, while Velchaninoff heard the rapid
interchange of whispers going on, and an occasional rather louder sound of
Liza’s voice, apparently entreating her father to leave her alone—so
Velchaninoff concluded.
At last the two came out.
“There you are—she’s dreadfully shy and proud,” said Pavel Pavlovitch;
“just like her mother.”
Liza entered the room without tears, but with eyes downcast, her father
leading her by the hand. She was a tall, slight, and very pretty little
girl. She raised her large blue eyes to the visitor’s face with curiosity;
but only glanced surlily at him, and dropped them again. There was that in
her expression that one always sees in children when they look on some new
guest for the first time—retiring to a corner, and looking out at him
thence seriously and mistrustingly; only that there was a something in her
manner beyond the usual childish mistrust—so, at least thought
Velchaninoff.
Her father brought her straight up to the visitor.
“There—this gentleman knew mother very well. He was our friend; you
mustn’t be shy,—give him your hand!”
The child bowed slightly, and timidly stretched out her hand.
“Natalia Vasilievna never would teach her to curtsey; she liked her to
bow, English fashion, and give her hand,” explained Pavel Pavlovitch,
gazing intently at Velchaninoff.
Velchaninoff knew perfectly well that the other was keenly examining him
at this moment, but he made no attempt to conceal his agitation: he sat
motionless on his chair and held the child’s hand in his, gazing into her
face the while.
But Liza was apparently much preoccupied, and did not take her eyes off
her father’s face; she listened timidly to every word he said.
Velchaninoff recognised her large blue eyes at once; but what specially
struck him was the refined pallor of her face, and the colour of her hair;
these traits were altogether too significant, in his eyes! Her features,
on the other hand, and the set of her lips, reminded him keenly of Natalia
Vasilievna. Meanwhile Pavel Pavlovitch was in the middle of some
apparently most interesting tale—one of great sentiment seemingly,—but
Velchaninoff did not hear a word of it until the last few words struck
upon his ear:
“... So that you can’t imagine what our joy was when Providence sent us
this gift, Alexey Ivanovitch! She was everything to me, for I felt that if
it should be the will of Heaven to deprive me of my other joy, I should
still have Liza left to me; that’s what I felt, sir, I did indeed!”
“And Natalia Vasilievna?” asked Velchaninoff.
“Oh, Natalia Vasilievna—” began Pavel Pavlovitch, smiling with one side of
his mouth; “she never used to like to say much—as you know yourself; but
she told me on her deathbed—deathbed! you know, sir—to the very day of her
death she used to get so angry and say that they were trying to cure her
with a lot of nasty medicines when she had nothing the matter but a simple
little feverish attack; and that when Koch arrived (you remember our old
doctor Koch?) he would make her all right in a fortnight. Why, five hours
before she died she was talking of fixing that day three weeks for a visit
to her Aunt, Liza’s godmother, at her country place!” Velchaninoff here
started from his seat, but still held the child’s hand. He could not help
thinking that there was something reproachful in the girl’s persistent
stare in her father’s face.
“Is she ill?” he asked hurriedly, and his voice had a strange tone in it.
“No! I don’t think so” said Pavel Pavlovitch; “but, you see our way of
living here, and all that: she’s a strange child and very nervous,
besides! After her mother’s death she was quite ill and hysterical for a
fortnight. Just before you came in she was crying like anything; and do
you know what about, sir? Do you hear me, Liza?—You listen!—Simply because
I was going out, and wished to leave her behind, and because she said I
didn’t love her so well as I used to in her mother’s time. That’s what she
pitches into me for! Fancy a child like this getting hold of such an
idea!—a child who ought to be playing at dolls, instead of developing
ideas of that sort! The thing is, she has no one to play with here.”
“Then—then—are you two quite alone here?”
“Quite! a servant comes in once a day, that’s all!”
“And when you go out, do you leave her quite alone?”
“Of course! What else am I to do? Yesterday I locked her in that room, and
that’s what all the tears were about this morning. What could I do? the
day before yesterday she went down into the yard all by herself, and a boy
took a shot at her head with a stone! Not only that, but she must needs go
and cling on to everybody she met, and ask where I had gone to! That’s not
so very pleasant, you see! But I oughtn’t to complain when I say I am
going out for an hour and then stay out till four in the morning, as I did
last night! The landlady came and let her out: she had the door broken
open! Nice for my feelings, eh! It’s all the result of the eclipse that
came over my life; nothing but that, sir!”
“Papa!” said the child, timidly and anxiously.
“Now, then! none of that again! What did I tell you yesterday?”
“I won’t; I won’t!” cried the child hurriedly, clasping her hands before
her entreatingly.
“Come! things can’t be allowed to go on in this way!” said Velchaninoff
impatiently, and with authority. “In the first place, you are a man of
property; how can you possibly live in a hole like this, and in such
disorder?”
“This place! Oh, but we shall probably have left this place within a week;
and I’ve spent a lot of money here, as it is, though I may be ’a man of
property;’ and——”
“Very well, that’ll do,” interrupted Velchaninoff with growing impatience,
“now, I’ll make you a proposition: you have just said that you intend to
stay another week—perhaps two. I have a house here—or rather I know a
family where I am as much at home as at my own fireside, and have been so
for twenty years. The family I mean is the Pogoryeltseffs—Alexander
Pavlovitch Pogoryeltseff is a state councillor (he may be of use to you in
your business!) They are now living in the country—they have a beautiful
country villa; Claudia Petrovna, the lady of the house, is like a
sister—like a mother to me; they have eight children. Let me take Liza
down to them without loss of time! they’ll receive her with joy, and
they’ll treat her like their own little daughter—they will, indeed!”
Velchaninoff was in a great hurry, and much excited, and he did not
conceal his feelings.
“I’m afraid it’s impossible!” said Pavel Pavlovitch with a grimace,
looking straight into his visitor’s eyes, very cunningly, as it seemed to
Velchaninoff.
“Why! why, impossible?”
“Oh, why! to let the child go—so suddenly, you know, of course with such a
sincere well-wisher as yourself—it’s not that!—but a strange house—and
such swells, too!—I don’t know whether they would receive her!”
“But I tell you I’m like a son of the house!” cried Velchaninoff, almost
angrily. “Claudia Petrovna will be delighted to take her, at one word from
me! She’d receive her as though she were my own daughter. Deuce take it,
sir, you know you are only humbugging me,—what’s the use of talking about
it?”
He stamped his foot.
“No—no! I mean to say—don’t it look a little strange? Oughtn’t I to call
once or twice first?—such a smart house as you say theirs is—don’t you
see——”
“I tell you it’s the simplest house in the world; it isn’t ‘smart’ in the
least bit,” cried Velchaninoff; “they have a lot of children: it will make
another girl of her!—I’ll introduce you there myself, to-morrow, if you
like. Of course you’ll have to go and thank them, and all that. You shall
go down every day with me, if you please.”
“Oh, but——”
“Nonsense! You know it’s nonsense! Now look here: you come to me this
evening—I’ll put you up for the night—and we’ll start off early to-morrow
and be down there by twelve.”
“Benefactor!—and I may spend the night at your house?” cried Pavel
Pavlovitch, instantly consenting to the plan with the greatest
cordiality,—“you are really _too_ good! And where’s their country house?”
“At the Liesnoy.”
“But look here, how about her dress? Such a house, you know,—a father’s
heart shrinks——”
“Nonsense!—she’s in mourning—what else could she wear but a black dress
like this? it’s exactly the thing; you couldn’t imagine anything more
so!—you might let her have some clean linen with her, and give her a
cleaner neck-handkerchief.”
“Directly, directly. We’ll get her linen together in a couple of
minutes—it’s just home from the wash!”
“Send for a carriage—can you? Tell them to let us have it at once, so as
not to waste time.”
But now an unexpected obstacle arose: Liza absolutely rejected the plan;
she had listened to it with terror, and if Velchaninoff had, in his
excited argument with Pavel Pavlovitch, had time to glance at the child’s
face, he would have observed her expression of absolute despair at this
moment.
“I won’t go!” she said, quietly but firmly.
“There—look at that! Just like her mamma!”
“I’m _not_ like mamma, I’m _not_ like mamma!” cried Liza, wringing her
little hands in despair. “Oh, papa—papa!” she added, “if you desert me—”
she suddenly threw herself upon the alarmed Velchaninoff—“If you take me
away—” she cried—“I’ll——”
But Liza had no time to finish her sentence, for Pavel Pavlovitch suddenly
seized her by the arm and collar and hustled her into the next room with
unconcealed rage. For several minutes Velchaninoff listened to the
whispering going on there,—whisperings and seemingly subdued crying on the
part of Liza. He was about to follow the pair, when suddenly out came
Pavel Pavlovitch, and stated—with a disagreeable grin—that Liza would come
directly.
Velchaninoff tried not to look at him and kept his eyes fixed on the other
side of the room.
The elderly woman whom Velchaninoff had met on the stairs also made her
appearance, and packed Liza’s things into a neat little carpet bag.
“Is it you that are going to take the little lady away, sir?” she asked;
“if so, you are doing a good deed! She’s a nice quiet child, and you are
saving her from goodness knows what, here!”
“Oh! come—Maria Sisevna,”—began Pavel Pavlovitch.
“Well? What? Isn’t it true! Arn’t you ashamed to let a girl of her
intelligence see the things that you allow to go on here? The carriage has
arrived for you, sir,—_you_ ordered one for the Liesnoy, didn’t you?”
“Yes.”
“Well, good luck to you!”
Liza came out, looking very pale and with downcast eyes; she took her bag,
but never glanced in Velchaninoff’s direction. She restrained herself and
did not throw herself upon her father, as she had done before—not even to
say good-bye. She evidently did not wish to look at him.
Her father kissed her and patted her head in correct form; her lip curled
during the operation, the chin trembled a little, but she did not raise
her eyes to her father’s.
Pavel Pavlovitch looked pale, and his hands shook; Velchaninoff saw that
plainly enough, although he did his best not to see the man at all. He
(Velchaninoff) had but one thought, and that was how to get away at once!
Downstairs was old Maria Sisevna, waiting to say good-bye; and more
kissing was done. Liza had just climbed into the carriage when suddenly
she caught sight of her father’s face; she gave a loud cry and wrung her
hands,—in another minute she would have been out of the carriage and away,
but luckily the vehicle went on and she was too late!
“Are you feeling faint?” asked Velchaninoff of his companion, frightened
out of his wits: “I’ll tell him to stop and get you some water, shall I?”
She looked at him angrily and reproachfully.
“Where are you taking me to?” she asked coldly and abruptly.
“To a very beautiful house, Liza. There are plenty of children,—they’ll
all love you there, they are so kind! Don’t be angry with me, Liza; I wish
you well, you know!”
In truth, Velchaninoff would have looked strange at this moment to any
acquaintance, if such had happened to see him!
“How—how—how—oh! _how_ wicked you are!” said Liza, fighting with
suppressed tears, and flashing her fine angry eyes at him.
“But Liza—I——”
“You are bad—bad—and wicked!” cried Liza. She wrung her hands.
Velchaninoff was beside himself.
“Oh, Liza, Liza! if only you knew what despair you are causing me!” he
said.
“Is it true that he is coming down to-morrow?” asked the child
haughtily—“is it true or not?”
“Quite true—I shall bring him down myself,—I shall take him and bring
him!”
“He will deceive you somehow!” cried the child, drooping her eyes.
“Doesn’t he love you, then, Liza?”
“No.”
“Has he ill-treated you,—has he?”
Liza looked gloomily at her questioner, and said nothing. She then turned
away from him and sat still and depressed.
Velchaninoff commenced to talk: he tried to win her,—he spoke
warmly—excitedly—feverishly.
Liza listened incredulously and with a hostile air,—but still she
listened. Her attention delighted him beyond measure;—he went so far as to
explain to her what it meant when a man took to drink. He said that he
loved her and would himself look after her father.
At last Liza raised her eyes and gazed fixedly at him.
Then Velchaninoff began to speak of her mother and of how well he had
known her; and he saw that his tales attracted her. Little by little she
began to reply to his questions, but very cautiously and in an obstinately
monosyllabic way.
She would answer nothing to his chief inquiries; as to her former
relations with her father, for instance, she maintained an obstinate
silence.
While speaking to her, Velchaninoff held the child’s hand in his own, as
before; and she did not try to take it away.
Liza said enough to make it apparent that she had loved her father more
than her mother at first, because that her father had loved the child
better than her mother did; but that when her mother had died and was
lying dead, Liza wept over her and kissed her, and ever since then she had
loved her mother more than all—all there was in the whole world—and that
every night she thought of her and loved her.
But Liza was very proud, and suddenly recollecting herself and finding
that she was saying a great deal more than she had meant to reveal, she
paused, and relapsed into obstinate silence once more, and gazed at
Velchaninoff with something like hatred in her eyes, considering that he
had beguiled her into the revelations just made.
By the end of the journey, however, her hysterical condition was nearly
over, but she was very silent and sat looking morosely about her,
obstinately silent and gloomy, like a little wild animal.
The fact that she was being taken to a strange house where she had never
been before did not seem so far to weigh upon her; Velchaninoff saw
clearly enough that other things distressed her, and principally that she
was ashamed—ashamed that her father should have let her go so
easily—thrown her away, as it were—into Velchaninoff’s arms.
“She’s ill,” thought the latter, “and perhaps very ill; she has been
bullied and ill-treated. Oh! that drunken, blackguardly wretch of a
fellow!” He hurried on the coachman. Velchaninoff trusted greatly to the
fresh air, to the garden, to the children, to the new life, now; as to the
future, he was in no sort of doubt at all, his hopes were clear and
defined. One thing he was quite sure of, and that was that he had never
before felt what now swelled within his soul, and that the sensation would
last for ever and ever.
“I have an object at last! this is Life!” he said to himself
enthusiastically.
Many thoughts welled into his brain just now, but he would have none of
them; he did not care to think of details at this moment, for without
details the future was all so clear and so beautiful, and so safe and
indestructible!
The basis of his plan was simple enough; it was simply this, in the
language of his own thoughts:
“I shall so work upon that drunken little blackguard that he will leave
Liza with the Pogoryeltseffs, and go away alone—at first, ‘for a time,’ of
course!—and so Liza shall remain behind for me! what more do I want? The
plan will suit him, too!—else why does he bully her like this?”
The carriage arrived at last.
It was certainly a very beautiful place. They were met first of all by a
troop of noisy children, who overflowed on to the front-door steps.
Velchaninoff had not been down for some time, and the delight of the
little ones to see him was excessive—they were very fond of him.
The elder ones shouted, before he had left the carriage, by way of chaff:
“How’s the lawsuit getting on, eh?” and the smaller gang took up the joke,
and all clamoured the same question: it was a pet joke in this
establishment to chaff Velchaninoff about his lawsuit. But when Liza
climbed down the carriage steps, she was instantly surrounded and stared
at with true juvenile curiosity. Then Claudia Petrovna and her husband
came out, and both of them good-humouredly bantered Velchaninoff about his
lawsuit.
Claudia Petrovna was a lady of some thirty-seven summers, stout and
well-favoured, and with a sweet fresh-looking face. Her husband was a man
of fifty-five, a clever and long-headed man of the world, but above all, a
good and kind-hearted friend to anyone requiring kindness.
The Pogoryeltseffs’ house was in the full sense of the word a “home” to
Velchaninoff, as the latter had stated. There was rather more here,
however; for, twenty years since Claudia had very nearly married young
Velchaninoff almost a boy at that time, and a student at the university.
This had been his first experience of love—and very hot and fiery and
funny—and sweet it was! The end of it was, however, that Claudia married
Mr Pogoryeltseff. Five years later she and Velchaninoff had met again, and
a quiet candid friendship had sprung up between them. Since then there had
always been a warmth, a speciality about their friendship, a radiance
which overspread it and glorified their relations one to the other. There
was nothing here that Velchaninoff could remember with shame—all was pure
and sweet; and this was perhaps the reason why the friendship was
specially dear to Velchaninoff; he had not experienced many such platonic
intimacies.
In this house Velchaninoff was simple and happy, confessed his sins,
played with the children and lectured them, and never bothered his head
about outside matters; he had promised the Pogoryeltseffs that he would
live a few more years alone in the world, and then move over to their
household for good and all; and he looked forward to that good time coming
with all seriousness.
Velchaninoff now gave all the information about Liza which he thought fit,
though his simple request would have been amply sufficient here.
Claudia Petrovna kissed the little “orphan,” and promised to do all she
possibly could for her; and the children carried Liza off to play in the
garden. Half an hour passed in conversation, and then Velchaninoff rose to
depart: he was in such a hurry, that his friends could not help remarking
upon the fact. He had not been near them for three weeks, they said, and
now he only stayed half an hour! Velchaninoff laughed and promised to come
down to-morrow. Someone observed that Velchaninoff’s state of agitation
was remarkable, even for _him_! Whereupon the latter jumped up, seized
Claudia Petrovna’s hand, and, under pretence of having forgotten to tell
her something most important about Liza, he led her into another room.
“Do you remember,” he began, “what I told you, and only you,—even your
husband does not know of it—about my year of life down at T——?”
“Oh yes! only too well! You have often spoken of it.”
“No—I did not ‘speak about it,’ I _confessed_, and only to yourself; but I
never told you the lady’s name. It was Trusotsky, the wife of this
Trusotsky; it is she who has died, and this little Liza is her child—_my_
child!”
“Is this certain? Are you quite sure there is no mistake?” asked Claudia
Petrovna, with some agitation.
“Quite, quite certain!” said Velchaninoff enthusiastically. He then gave a
short, hasty, and excited narrative of all that had occurred. Claudia had
heard it all before, excepting the lady’s name.
The fact is, Velchaninoff had always been so afraid that one of his
friends might some fine day meet Madame Trusotsky at T——, and wonder how
in the world he could have loved such a woman as that, that he had never
revealed her name to a single soul; not even to Claudia Petrovna, his
great friend.
“And does the ‘father’ know nothing of it?” asked Claudia, having heard
the tale out.
“N—no; he knows—you see, that’s just what is bothering me now. I haven’t
sifted the matter as yet,” resumed Velchaninoff hotly. “He must know—he
_does_ know. I remarked that fact both yesterday and to-day. But I wish to
discover _how much_ he knows. That’s why I am hurrying back now; he is
coming to-night. He knows all about Bagantoff; but how about myself? You
know how such wives can deceive their husbands! If an angel from Heaven
were to come down and convict a woman, her husband will still trust her,
and give the angel the lie.
“Oh! don’t nod your head at me, don’t judge me! I have long since judged
and convicted myself. You see, this morning I felt so sure that he knew
all, that I compromised myself before him. Fancy, I was really ashamed of
having been rude to him last night. He only called in to see me out of the
pure unconquerably malicious desire to show me that he knew all the
offence, and knew who was the offender! I behaved like a fool; I gave
myself into his hands too easily; I was too heated; he came at such a
feverish moment for me. I tell you, he has been bullying Liza, simply to
‘let off bile,’—you understand. He needs a safety-valve for his offended
feelings, and vents them upon _anyone_, even a little child!
“It is exasperation, and quite natural. We must treat him in a Christian
spirit, my friend; and do you know, I wish to change my way of treating
him, entirely; I wish to be particularly kind to him. That will be a good
action on my part, for I am to blame before him, I know I am; there’s no
disguising the fact! Besides, once at T——, it so happened that I required
four thousand roubles at a moment’s notice. Well, the fellow gave me the
money, without a receipt, at once, and with every manifestation of delight
to be able to serve me! And I took the money from his hands,—I did,
indeed! I took it as though he were a friend. Think of that!”
“Very well; only be careful!” said Claudia Petrovna. “You are so
enthusiastic that I am really alarmed for you! Of course Liza shall now be
no less than my own daughter to me; but there is so much to know and to
settle yet! Above all, be very careful and observant! You are not nearly
careful enough when you are happy! You are much too exalted an individual
to be cautious, when you are happy!” she added with a smile.
The whole family went out to see Velchaninoff off. The children brought
Liza along with them; they had been playing in the garden. They seemed to
look at her now with even more perplexity then at first! The girl became
dreadfully shy when Velchaninoff kissed her before all, and promised to
come down next day and bring her father with him. To the last moment she
did not say a single word, and never looked at him at all; but just before
he was about to start she seized his hand and drew him away to one side,
looking imploringly in his face: she evidently had something to say to
him. Velchaninoff immediately took her into an adjoining room.
“What is it, Liza?” he asked, kindly and encouragingly; but she drew him
farther away,—into the very farthest corner of the room, anxious to get
well out of sight and hearing of the rest.
“What is it, Liza? What is it?”
But she was still silent, and could not make up her mind to speak; she
stared with her motionless, large blue eyes, into his face, and in every
lineament of her little face was betrayed the wildest terror and anxiety.
“He’ll—hang himself!” she whispered at last, as though she were talking in
her sleep.
“Who will hang himself?” asked Velchaninoff, in alarm.
“He will—_he_! He tried to hang himself to a hook last night!” said the
child, panting with haste and excitement; “I saw it myself! To-day he
tried it again,—he wishes to hang himself; he told me so!—he told me so!
He wanted to, long ago; he has always wanted to do it! I saw it myself—in
the night!”
“Impossible!” muttered Velchaninoff, incredulously.
Liza suddenly threw herself into his arms, kissed his hands, and cried.
She could hardly breathe for sobbing; she was begging and imploring
Velchaninoff, but he could not understand what she was trying to say.
Velchaninoff never afterwards forgot the terrible look of this distressed
child; he thought of it waking and thought of it sleeping—how she had come
to him in her despair as to her last hope, and hysterically begged and
prayed him to help her! “And to think of her being so deeply attached to
him!” he reflected jealously, as he drove, impatient and feverish, towards
town. “She said herself that she loved her mother better;—perhaps she
hates him, and doesn’t love him at all! And what’s all that nonsense about
‘hanging himself!’ What did she mean by that? As if he would hang himself,
the fool! I must sift the matter—the whole matter. I must settle this
business once and for ever—and quickly!”
He was in a great hurry to “know all.” In order to lose no time about
finding out what he felt he must know at once, he told the coachman to
drive him straight to Trusotsky’s rooms. On the way he changed his mind;
“let him come to me, himself,” he thought, “and meanwhile I can attend to
my cursed law business.”
But to-day he really felt that he was too absent to attend to anything at
all; and at five o’clock he set out with the intention of dining. And at
this moment, for the first time, an amusing idea struck him. What if he
really only hindered his law business by meddling as he did, and hunting
his wretched lawyer about the place, when the latter plainly avoided
meeting him? Velchaninoff laughed merrily over this idea. “And yet,” he
thought; “if this notion had struck me in the evening instead of now, how
angry I should have been!” He laughed again, more merrily than before. But
in spite of his merriness he grew more and more thoughtful and impatient,
and could settle to nothing, nor could he think out what he most wanted to
reflect upon.
“I _must_ have that fellow here!” he said at length; “I must read the
mystery of _him_ first of all, and then I can settle what to do next.
There’s a duel in this business!”
Returning home at seven o’clock he did not find Pavel Pavlovitch there,
which fact first surprised him, then angered him, then depressed him, and
at last, frightened him.
“God knows, God knows how it will all end!” he cried; first trying to
settle himself on a sofa, and then marching up and down the room, and all
the while looking at his watch every other minute.
At length—at about nine o’clock—Pavel Pavlovitch appeared.
“If this man was cunning enough to mean it he could not have managed
better in order to put me into a state of nervousness!” thought
Velchaninoff, though his heart bounded for joy to see his guest arrive.
To Velchaninoff’s cordial inquiry as to why he was so late, Pavel
Pavlovitch smiled disagreeably—took a seat with easy familiarity,
carelessly threw his crapebound hat on a chair,—and made himself perfectly
at home. Velchaninoff observed and took stock of the careless manner
adopted by his visitor; it was not like yesterday. Velchaninoff then
quietly, and in a few words, gave Pavel Pavlovitch an account of what he
had done with Liza, of how kindly she had been received, of how good it
would be for the child down there; then he led the conversation to the
topic of the Pogoryeltseffs, leaving Liza out of the talking altogether,
and spoke of how kind the whole family were, of how long he had known
them, and so on.
Pavel Pavlovitch listened absently, occasionally looking ironically at his
host from under his eyelashes.
“What an enthusiast you are!” he muttered at last, smiling very
unpleasantly.
“Hum, you seem in a bad humour to-day!” remarked Velchaninoff with
annoyance.
“And why shouldn’t I be as wicked as my neighbours?” cried Pavel
Pavlovitch suddenly! He said this so abruptly that he gave one the idea
that he had pounced out of a corner where he had been lurking, on purpose
to make a dash at the first opportunity.
“Oh dear me! do as you like, pray!” laughed Velchaninoff; “I only thought
something had put you out, perhaps!”
“So it has,” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, as though proud of the fact.
“Well, what was it?”
Pavel Pavlovitch waited a moment or two before he replied.
“Why it’s that Stepan Michailovitch Bagantoff of ours—up to his tricks
again; he’s a shining light among the highest circles of society—he is!”
“Wouldn’t he receive you again—or what?”
“N—no! not quite that, this time; on the contrary I was allowed to go in
for the first time on record, and I had the honour of musing over his
features, too!—but he happened to be a corpse, that’s all!”
“What! Bagantoff dead?” cried Velchaninoff, in the greatest astonishment;
though there was no particular reason why he _should_ be surprised.
“Yes—my unalterable—six-years-standing friend is dead!—died yesterday at
about mid-day, and I knew nothing of it! Perhaps he died just when I
called there—who knows? To-morrow is the funeral! he’s in his coffin at
this moment! Died of nervous fever; and they let me in to see him—they did
indeed!—to contemplate his features! I told them I was a great friend—and
therefore they allowed me in! A pretty trick he has played me—this dear
friend of six years’ standing! why—perhaps I came to St. Petersburg
_specially for him_!”
“Well—it’s hardly worth your while to be angry with him about it, is it—he
didn’t die on purpose!” said Velchaninoff laughing.
“Oh, but I’m speaking out of pure sympathy—he was a _dear_ friend to me!
oh a _very_ dear friend!”
Pavel Pavlovitch gave a smile of detestable irony and cunning.
“Do you know what, Alexey Ivanovitch,” he resumed, “I think you ought to
treat me to something,—I have often treated you; I used to be your host
every blessed day, sir, at T——, for a whole year! Send for a bottle of
wine, do—my throat is so dry!”
“With pleasure—why didn’t you say so before! what would you like?”
“Don’t say ‘you!’ say ‘we’! we’ll drink together of course!” said Pavel
Pavlovitch defiantly, but at the same time looking into Velchaninoff’s
eyes with some concern.
“Shall it be champagne?”
“Of course! it isn’t time for vodki yet!”
Velchaninoff rose slowly—rang the bell and gave Mavra the necessary
orders.
“We’ll drink to this happy meeting of friends after nine years’ parting!”
said Pavel Pavlovitch, with a very inappropriate and unnecessary giggle.
“Why, you are the only real, true friend left to me now! Bagantoff is no
more! it quite reminds one of the great poet:
“Great Patroclus is no more,
Mean Thersites liveth yet!”
—and so on,—don’t you know!”
At the name “Thersites” Pavel Pavlovitch touched his own breast.
“I wish you would speak plainly, you pig of a fellow!” said Velchaninoff
to himself, “I hate hints!” His own anger was on the rise, and he had long
been struggling with his self-restraint.
“Look here,—tell me this, since you consider Bagantoff to have been guilty
before you (as I see you do) surely you must be glad that your betrayer is
dead? What are you so angry about?”
“Glad! Why should I be glad?”
“I judge by what I should imagine your feelings to be.”
“Ha-ha! well, this time you are a little bit in error as to my feelings,
for once! A certain sage has said ’my good enemy is dead, but I have a
still better one alive! ha-ha!”
“Well but you saw him alive for five years at a stretch,—I should have
thought that was enough to contemplate his features in!” said Velchaninoff
angrily and contemptuously.
“Yes, but how was I to know then, sir?” snapped Pavel Pavlovitch—jumping
out of an ambush once more, as it were,—delighted to be asked a question
which he had long awaited; “why, what do you take me for, Alexey
Ivanovitch?” at this moment there was in the speaker’s face a new
expression altogether, transfiguring entirely the hitherto merely
disagreeably malicious look upon it.
“Do you mean to say you knew nothing of it?” said Velchaninoff in
astonishment.
“How! Didn’t know? As if I could have known it and——Oh, you race of
Jupiters! you reckon a man to be no better than a dog, and judge of him by
your own sentiments. Look here, sir,—there, look at that.” So saying, he
brought his fist madly down upon the table with a resounding bang, and
immediately afterwards looked frightened at his own act.
Velchaninoff’s face beamed.
“Listen, Pavel Pavlovitch,” he said; “it is entirely the same thing to me
whether you knew or did not know all about it. If you did not know, so
much the more honourable is it for you; but—I can’t understand why you
should have selected me for your confidant.”
“I wasn’t talking of you; don’t be angry, it wasn’t about you,” muttered
Pavel Pavlovitch, with his eyes fixed on the ground.
At this moment, Mavra entered with the champagne.
“Here it is!” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, immensely delighted at the
appearance of the wine. “Now then, tumblers my good girl, tumblers quick!
Capital! Thank you, we don’t require you any more, my good Mavra. What!
you’ve drawn the cork? Excellent creature. Well, ta-ta! off with you.”
Mavra’s advent with the bottle so encouraged him that he again looked at
Velchaninoff with some defiance.
“Now confess,” he giggled suddenly, “confess that you are very curious
indeed to hear about all this, and that it is by no means ‘entirely the
same to you,’ as you declared! Confess that you would be miserable if I
were to get up and go away this very minute without telling you anything
more.”
“Not the least in the world, I assure you!”
Pavel Pavlovitch smiled; and his smile said, as plainly as words could,
“That’s a lie!”
“Well, let’s to business,” he said, and poured out two glasses of
champagne.
“Here’s a toast,” he continued, raising his goblet, “to the health in
Paradise of our dear departed friend Bagantoff.”
He raised his glass and drank.
“I won’t drink such a toast as that!” said Velchaninoff; and put his glass
down on the table.
“Why not? It’s a very pretty toast.”
“Look here, were you drunk when you came here?”
“A little; why?”
“Oh—nothing particular. Only it appeared to me that yesterday, and
especially this morning, you were sincerely sorry for the loss of Natalia
Vasilievna.”
“And who says I am not sorry now?” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, as if somebody
had pulled a string and made him snap the words out, like a doll.
“No, I don’t mean that; but you must admit you may be in error about
Bagantoff; and that’s a serious matter!”
Pavel Pavlovitch grinned and gave a wink.
“Hey! Wouldn’t you just like to know how I found out about Bagantoff, eh?”
Velchaninoff blushed.
“I repeat, it’s all the same to me,” he said; and added to himself,
“Hadn’t I better pitch him and the bottle out of the window together.” He
was blushing more and more now.
Pavel Pavlovitch poured himself out another glass.
“I’ll tell you directly how I found out all about Mr. Bagantoff, and your
burning wish shall be satisfied. For you are a fiery sort of man, you
know, Alexey Ivanovitch, oh, dreadfully so! Ha-ha-ha. Just give me a
cigarette first, will you, for ever since March——”
“Here’s a cigarette for you.”
“Ever since March I have been a depraved man, sir, and this is how it all
came about. Listen. Consumption, as you know, my dear friend” (Pavel
Pavlovitch was growing more and more familiar!), “is an interesting
malady. One sees a man dying of consumption without a suspicion that
to-morrow is to be his last day. Well, I told you how Natalia Vasilievna,
up to five hours before her death, talked about going to visit her aunt,
who lived thirty miles or so away, and starting in a fortnight. You know
how some ladies—and gentlemen, too, I daresay—have the bad habit of
keeping a lot of old rubbish by them, in the way of love-letters and so
on. It would be much safer to stick them all into the fire, wouldn’t it?
But no, they must keep every little scrap of paper in drawers and desks,
and endorse it and classify it, and tie it up in bundles, for each year
and month and class! I don’t know whether they find this consoling to
their feelings afterwards, or what. Well, since she was arranging a visit
to her aunt just five hours before her death, Natalia Vasilievna naturally
did not expect to die so soon; in fact, she was expecting old Doctor Koch
down till the last; and so, when Natalia Vasilievna _did_ die, she left
behind her a beautiful little black desk all inlaid with mother-of-pearl,
and bound with silver, in her bureau; oh, a lovely little box, an heirloom
left her by her grandmother, with a lock and key all complete. Well, sir,
in this box everything—I mean _everything_, you know, for every day and
hour for the last twenty years—was disclosed; and since Mr. Bagantoff had
a decided taste for literature (indeed, he had published a passionate
novel once, I am told, in a newspaper!)—consequently there were about a
hundred examples of his genius in the desk, ranging over a period of five
years. Some of these talented effusions were covered with pencilled
remarks by Natalia Vasilievna herself! Pleasant, that, for a fond
husband’s feelings, sir, eh?”
Velchaninoff quickly cast his thoughts back over the past, and remembered
that he had never written a single letter or a single note to Natalia
Vasilievna.
He had written a couple of letters from St. Petersburg, but, according to
a previous arrangement, he had addressed them to both Mr. and Mrs.
Trusotsky together. He had not answered Natalia Vasilievna’s last
letter—which had contained his dismissal—at all.
Having ended his speech, Pavel Pavlovitch relapsed into silence, and sat
smiling repulsively for a whole minute or so.
“Why don’t you answer my question, my friend?” he asked, at length,
evidently disturbed by Velchaninoff’s silence.
“What question?”
“As to the pleasure I must have felt as a fond husband, upon opening the
desk.”
“Your feelings are no business of mine!” said the other bitterly, rising
and commencing to stride up and down the room.
“I wouldn’t mind betting that you are thinking at this very moment: ‘What
a pig of a fellow he is to parade his shame like this!’ Ha-ha! dear me,
what a squeamish gentleman you are to be sure!”
“Not at all. I was thinking nothing of the sort; on the contrary, I
consider that you are—besides being more or less intoxicated—so put out by
the death of the man who has injured you that you are not yourself.
There’s nothing surprising in it at all! I quite understand why you wish
Bagantoff were still alive, and am ready to respect your annoyance, but——”
“And pray _why_ do you suppose that I wish Bagantoff were alive?”
“Oh, that’s your affair!”
“I’ll take my oath you are thinking of a duel!”
“Devil take it, sir!” cried Velchaninoff, obliged to hold himself tighter
than ever. “I was thinking that you, like every respectable person in
similar circumstances, would act openly and candidly and
straightforwardly, and not humiliate yourself with comical antics and
silly grimaces, and ridiculous complaints and detestable innuendoes, which
only heap greater shame upon you. I say I was thinking you would act like
a respectable person.”
“Ha-ha-ha!—but perhaps I am _not_ a respectable person!”
“Oh, well, that’s your own affair again and yet, if so, what in the
devil’s name could you want with Bagantoff alive?”
“Oh, my dear sir, I should have liked just to have a nice peep at a dear
old friend, that’s all. We should have got hold of a bottle of wine, and
drunk it together!”
“He wouldn’t have drunk with _you_!”
“Why not? _Noblesse oblige?_ Why, _you_ are drinking with me. Wherein is
he better than you?”
“I have not drunk with you.”
“Wherefore this sudden pride, sir?”
Velchaninoff suddenly burst into a fit of nervous, irritable laughter.
“Why, deuce take it all!” he cried, “you are quite a different type to
what I believed. I thought you were nothing but a ‘permanent husband,’ but
I find you are a sort of bird of prey.”
“What! ‘permanent husband?’ What is a ‘permanent husband?’ ” asked Pavel
Pavlovitch, pricking up his ears.
“Oh—just one type of husbands—that’s all, it’s too long to explain. Come,
you’d better get out now; it’s quite time you went. I’m sick of you!”
“And bird of prey, sir; what did that mean?”
“I said you were a bird of prey for a joke.”
“Yes; but—bird of prey—tell me what you mean, Alexey Ivanovitch, for
goodness sake!”
“Come, come, that’s quite enough!” shouted Velchaninoff, suddenly flaring
up and speaking at the top of his voice. “It’s time you went; get out of
this, will you?”
“No, sir, it’s _not_ enough!” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, jumping up, too.
“Even if you _are_ sick of me, sir, it’s not enough; for you must first
drink and clink glasses with me. I won’t go before you do! No, no; oh dear
no! drink first; it’s _not_ enough yet.”
“Pavel Pavlovitch, will you go to the devil or will you not?”
“With pleasure, sir. I’ll go to the devil with pleasure; but first we must
drink. You say you don’t wish to drink _with me_; but _I wish you_ to
drink with me—actually _with me_.”
Pavel Pavlovitch was grimacing and giggling no longer. He seemed to be
suddenly transfigured again, and was as different from the Pavel
Pavlovitch of but a few moments since as he could possibly be, both in
appearance and in the tone of his voice; so much so that Velchaninoff was
absolutely confounded.
“Come, Alexey Ivanovitch, let’s drink!—don’t refuse me!” continued Pavel
Pavlovitch, seizing the other tightly by the hand and gazing into his face
with an extraordinary expression.
It was clear there was more in this matter than the mere question of
drinking a glass of wine.
“Well,” muttered Velchaninoff, “but that’s nothing but dregs!”
“No, there’s just a couple of glasses left—it’s quite clear. Now then,
clink glasses and drink. There, I’ll take your glass and you take mine.”
They touched glasses and drank.
“Oh, Alexey Ivanovitch! now that we’ve drunk together—oh!” Pavel
Pavlovitch suddenly raised his hand to his forehead and sat still for a
few moments.
Velchaninoff trembled with excitement. He thought Pavel Pavlovitch was
about to disclose _all_; but Pavel Pavlovitch said nothing whatever. He
only looked at him, and quietly smiled his detestable cunning smile in the
other’s face.
“What do you want with me, you drunken wretch?” cried Velchaninoff,
furious, and stamping his foot upon the floor; “you are making a fool of
me!”
“Don’t shout so—don’t shout! Why make such a noise?” cried Pavel
Pavlovitch. “I’m not making a fool of you! Do you know what you are to me
now?” and he suddenly seized Velchaninoff’s hand, and kissed it before
Velchaninoff could recollect himself.
“There, that’s what you are to me _now_; and now I’ll go to the devil.”
“Wait a bit—stop!” cried Velchaninoff, recollecting himself; “there’s
something I wished to say to you.”
Pavel Pavlovitch turned back from the door.
“You see,” began Velchaninoff, blushing and keeping his eye well away from
the other, “you ought to go with me to the Pogoryeltseffs to-morrow—just
to thank them, you know, and make their acquaintance.”
“Of course, of course; quite so!” said Pavel Pavlovitch readily, and
making a gesture of the hand to imply that he knew his duty, and there was
no need to remind him of it.
“Besides Liza expects you anxiously—I promised her.”
“Liza?” Pavel Pavlovitch turned quickly once more upon him. “Liza? Do you
know, sir, what this Liza has been to me—has been and is?” he cried
passionately and almost beside himself; “but—no!—afterwards—that shall be
afterwards! Meanwhile it’s not enough for me, Alexey Ivanovitch, that we
have drunk together; there’s another satisfaction I must have, sir!” He
placed his hat on a chair, and, panting with excitement, gazed at his
companion with much the same expression as before.
“Kiss me, Alexey Ivanovitch!”
“Are you drunk?” cried the other, drawing back.
“Yes, I am—but kiss me all the same, Alexey Ivanovitch—oh, do! I kissed
your hand just now, you know.”
Alexey Ivanovitch was silent for a few moments, as though stunned by the
blow of a cudgel. Then he quickly bent down to Pavel Pavlovitch (who was
about the height of his shoulder), and kissed his lips, from which
proceeded a disagreeably powerful odour of wine. He performed the action
as though not quite certain of what he was doing.
“Well! _now, now!_” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, with drunken enthusiasm, and
with his eyes flashing fiercely; “_now_—look here—I’ll tell you what! I
thought at that time: ‘Surely not _he_, too! If _this_ man,’ I thought,
‘if _this_ man is guilty too—then whom am I ever to trust again!’ ”
Pavel Pavlovitch suddenly burst into tears.
“So now you must understand _how_ dear a friend you are to me henceforth.”
With these words he took his hat and rushed out of the room.
Velchaninoff stood for several minutes in one spot, just as he had done
after Pavel Pavlovitch’s first visit.
“It’s merely a drunken sally—nothing more!” he muttered. “Absolutely
nothing further!” he repeated, when he was undressed and settled down in
his bed.
Next morning, while waiting for Pavel Pavlovitch, who had promised to be
in good time in order to drive down to the Pogoryeltseffs with him,
Velchaninoff walked up and down the room, sipped his coffee, and every
other minute reflected upon one and the same idea; namely, that he felt
like a man who had awaked from sleep with the deep impression of having
received a box on the ear the last thing at night.
“Hm!” he thought, anxiously, “he understands the state of the case only
too well; he’ll take it out of me by means of Liza!” The dear image of the
poor little girl danced before his eyes. His heart beat quicker when he
reflected that to-day—in a couple of hours—he would see _his own_ Liza
once more. “Yes—there’s no question about it,” he said to himself; “my
whole end and aim in life is _there_ now! What do I care about all these
‘memories’ and boxes on the ear; and what have I lived for up to now?—for
sorrow and discomfort—that’s all! but _now_, now—it’s all different!”
But in spite of his ecstatic feelings he grew more and more thoughtful.
“He is worrying me for Liza, that’s plain; and he bullies Liza—he is going
to take it out of me that way—for _all_! Hm! at all events I cannot
possibly allow such sallies as his of last night,” and Velchaninoff
blushed hotly “and here’s half-past eleven and he hasn’t come yet.” He
waited long—till half-past twelve, and his anguish of impatience grew more
and more keen. Pavel Pavlovitch did not appear. At length the idea began
to take shape that Pavel Pavlovitch naturally would not come again for the
sole purpose of another scene like that of last night. The thought filled
Velchaninoff with despair. “The brute knows I am depending upon him—and
what on earth am I to do now about Liza? How can I make my appearance
without him?”
At last he could bear it no longer and set off to the Pokrofsky at one
o’clock to look for Pavel Pavlovitch.
At the lodging, Velchaninoff was informed that Pavel Pavlovitch had not
been at home all night, and had only called in at nine o’clock, stayed a
quarter of an hour, and had gone out again.
Velchaninoff stood at the door listening to the servants’ report,
mechanically tried the handle, recollected himself, and asked to see Maria
Sisevna.
The latter obeyed his summons at once.
She was a kind-hearted old creature, of generous feelings, as Velchaninoff
described her afterwards to Claudia Petrovna. Having first enquired as to
his journey yesterday with Liza, Maria launched into anecdotes of Pavel
Pavlovitch. She declared that she would long ago have turned her lodger
out neck and crop, but for the child. Pavel Pavlovitch had been turned out
of the hotel for generally disreputable behaviour. “Oh, he does dreadful
things!” she continued. “Fancy his telling the poor child, in anger, that
she wasn’t his daughter, but——”
“Oh no, no! impossible!” cried Velchaninoff in alarm.
“I heard it myself! She’s only a small child, of course, but that sort of
thing doesn’t do before an intelligent child like her! She cried
dreadfully—she was quite upset. We had a catastrophe in the house a short
while since. Some commissionnaire or somebody took a room in the evening,
and hung himself before morning. He had bolted with money, they say. Well,
crowds of people came in to stare at him. Pavel Pavlovitch wasn’t at home,
but the child had escaped and was wandering about; and she must needs go
with the rest to see the sight. I saw her looking at the suicide with an
extraordinary expression, and carried her off at once, of course; and
fancy, I hardly managed to get home with her—trembling all over she
was—when off she goes in a dead faint, and it was all I could do to bring
her round at all. I don’t know whether she’s epileptic or what—and ever
since that she has been ill. When her father heard, he came and pinched
her all over—he doesn’t beat her; he always pinches her like that,—then he
went out and got drunk somewhere, and came back and frightened her. ‘I’m
going to hang myself too,’ he says, ‘because of you. I shall hang myself
on that blind string there,’ he says, and he makes a loop in the string
before her very eyes. The poor little thing went quite out of her mind
with terror, and cried and clasped him round with her little arms. ‘I’ll
be good—I’ll be good!’ she shrieks. It was a pitiful sight—it was,
indeed!”
Velchaninoff, though prepared for strange revelations concerning Pavel
Pavlovitch and his ways, was quite dumbfounded by these tales; he could
scarcely believe his ears.
Maria Sisevna told him many more such little anecdotes. Among others,
there was one occasion, when, if she (Maria) had not been by, Liza would
have thrown herself out of the window.
Pavel Pavlovitch had come staggering out of the room muttering, “I shall
smash her head in with a stick! I shall murder her like a dog!” and he had
gone away, repeating this over and over again to himself.
Velchaninoff hired a carriage and set off towards the Pogoryeltseffs.
Before he had left the town behind him, the carriage was delayed by a
block at a cross road, just by a small bridge, over which was passing, at
the moment, a long funeral procession. There were carriages waiting to
move on on both sides of the bridge, and a considerable crowd of foot
passengers besides.
The funeral was evidently of some person of considerable importance, for
the train of private and hired vehicles was a very long one; and at the
window of one of these carriages in the procession Velchaninoff suddenly
beheld the face of Pavel Pavlovitch.
Velchaninoff would not have believed his eyes, but that Pavel Pavlovitch
nodded his head and smiled to him. He seemed to be delighted to have
recognised Velchaninoff; he even began to kiss his hand out of the window.
Velchaninoff jumped out of his own vehicle, and in spite of policemen,
crowd, and everything else, elbowed his way to Pavel Pavlovitch’s carriage
window. He found the latter sitting alone.
“What are you doing?” he cried. “Why didn’t you come to my house? Why are
you here?”
“I’m paying a debt; don’t shout so! I’m repaying a debt,” said Pavel
Pavlovitch, giggling and winking. “I’m escorting the mortal remains of my
dear friend Stepan Michailovitch Bagantoff!”
“What absurdity, you drunken, insane creature,” cried Velchaninoff louder
than ever, and beside himself with outraged feeling. “Get out and come
with me. Quick! get out instantly!”
“I can’t. It’s a debt——”
“I’ll pull you out, then!” shouted Velchaninoff.
“Then I’ll scream, sir, I’ll scream!” giggled Pavel Pavlovitch, as merrily
as ever, just as though the whole thing was a joke. However, he retreated
into the further corner of the carriage, all the same.
“Look out, sir, look out! You’ll be knocked down!” cried a policeman.
Sure enough, an outside carriage was making its way on to the bridge from
the side, stopping the procession, and causing a commotion. Velchaninoff
was obliged to spring aside, and the press of carriages and people
immediately separated him from Pavel Pavlovitch. He shrugged his shoulders
and returned to his own vehicle.
“It’s all the same. I couldn’t take such a fellow with me, anyhow,” he
reflected, still all of a tremble with excitement and the rage of disgust.
When he repeated Maria Sisevna’s story, and his meeting at the funeral, to
Claudia Petrovna afterwards, the latter became buried in deep thought.
“I am anxious for you,” she said at last. “You must break off all
relations with that man, and as soon as possible.”
“Oh, he’s nothing but a drunken fool!” cried Velchaninoff passionately;
“as if I am to be afraid of _him_! And how can I break off relations with
him? Remember Liza!”
Meanwhile Liza was lying ill; fever had set in last night, and an eminent
doctor was momentarily expected from town! He had been sent for early this
morning.
These news quite upset Velchaninoff. Claudia Petrovna took him in to see
the patient.
“I observed her very carefully yesterday,” she said, stopping at the door
of Liza’s room before entering it. “She is a proud and morose child. She
is ashamed of being with us, and of having been thrown over by her father.
In my opinion that is the whole secret of her illness.”
“How ‘thrown over’? Why do you suppose that he has thrown her over?”
“The simple fact that he allowed her to come here to a strange house, and
with a man who was also a stranger, or nearly so; or, at all events, with
whom his relations were such that——”
“Oh, but I took her myself, almost by force.”
Liza was not surprised to see Velchaninoff alone. She only smiled
bitterly, and turned her hot face to the wall. She made no reply to his
passionate promises to bring her father down to-morrow without fail, or to
his timid attempts at consolation.
As soon as Velchaninoff left the sick child’s presence, he burst into
tears.
The doctor did not arrive until evening. On seeing the patient he
frightened everybody by his very first remark, observing that it was a
pity he had not been sent for before.
When informed that the child had only been taken ill last night, he could
not believe it at first.
“Well, it all depends upon how this night is passed,” he decided at last.
Having made all necessary arrangements, he took his departure, promising
to come as early as possible next morning.
Velchaninoff was anxious to stay the night, but Claudia Petrovna begged
him to try once more “to bring down that brute of a man.”
“Try once more!” cried Velchaninoff, passionately; “why, I’ll tie him hand
and foot and bring him along myself!”
The idea that he would tie Pavel Pavlovitch up and carry him down in his
arms overpowered Velchaninoff, and filled him with impatience to execute
his frantic desire.
“I don’t feel the slightest bit guilty before him any more,” he said to
Claudia Petrovna, at parting, “and I withdraw all my servile, abject words
of yesterday—all I said to you,” he added, wrathfully.
Liza lay with closed eyes, apparently asleep; she seemed to be better.
When Velchaninoff bent cautiously over her in order to kiss—if it were but
the edge of her bed linen—she suddenly opened her eyes, just as though she
had been waiting for him, and whispered, “Take me away!”
It was but a quiet, sad petition—without a trace of yesterday’s
irritation; but at the same time there was that in her voice which
betrayed that she made the request in the full knowledge that it could not
be assented to.
No sooner did Velchaninoff, in despair, begin to assure her as tenderly as
he could that what she desired was impossible, than she silently closed
her eyes and said not another word, just as though she neither saw nor
heard him.
Arrived in town Velchaninoff told his man to drive him to the Pokrofsky.
It was ten o’clock at night.
Pavel Pavlovitch was not at his lodgings. Velchaninoff waited for him half
an hour, walking up and down the passage in a state of feverish
impatience. Maria Sisevna assured him at last that Pavel Pavlovitch would
not come in until the small hours.
“Well, then, I’ll return here before daylight,” he said, beside himself
with desperation, and he went home to his own rooms.
What was his amazement, when, on arriving at the gate of his house, he
learned from Mavra that “yesterday’s visitor” had been waiting for him
ever since before ten o’clock.
“He’s had some tea,” she added, “and sent me for wine again—the same wine
as yesterday. He gave me the money to buy it with.”
Pavel Pavlovitch had made himself very comfortable. He was sitting in the
same chair as he had occupied yesterday, smoking a cigar, and had just
poured the fourth and last tumbler of champagne out of the bottle.
The teapot and a half-emptied tumbler of tea stood on the table beside
him; his red face beamed with benevolence. He had taken off his coat, and
sat in his shirt sleeves.
“Forgive me, dearest of friends,” he cried, catching sight of
Velchaninoff, and hastening to put on his coat, “I took it off to make
myself thoroughly comfortable.”
Velchaninoff approached him menacingly.
“You are not quite tipsy yet, are you? Can you understand what is said to
you?”
Paul Pavlovitch became a little confused.
“No, not quite. I’ve been thinking of the dear deceased a bit, but I’m not
quite drunk yet.”
“Can you understand what I say?”
“My dear sir, I came here on purpose to understand you.”
“Very well, then I shall begin at once by telling you that you are an ass,
sir!” cried Velchaninoff, at the top of his voice.
“Why, if you begin that way where will you end, I wonder!” said Pavel
Pavlovitch, clearly alarmed more than a little.
Velchaninoff did not listen, but roared again,
“Your daughter is dying—she is very ill! Have you thrown her over
altogether, or not?”
“Oh, surely she isn’t dying yet?”
“I tell you she’s ill; very, very ill—dangerously ill.”
“What, fits? or——”
“Don’t talk nonsense. I tell you she is very dangerously ill. You ought to
go down, if only for that reason.”
“What, to thank your friends, eh? to return thanks for their hospitality?
Of course, quite so; I well understand, Alexey Ivanovitch—dearest of
friends!” He suddenly seized Velchaninoff by both hands, and added with
intoxicated sentiment, almost melted to tears, “Alexey Ivanovitch, don’t
shout at me—don’t shout at me, please! If you do, I may throw myself into
the Neva—I don’t know!—and we have such important things to talk over.
There’s lots of time to go to the Pogoryeltseffs another day.”
Velchaninoff did his best to restrain his wrath. “You are drunk, and
therefore I don’t understand what you are driving at,” he said sternly.
“I’m ready to come to an explanation with you at any moment you
like—delighted!—the the sooner the better. But first let me tell you that
I am going to take my own measures to secure you. You will sleep here
to-night, and to-morrow I shall take you with me to see Liza. I shall not
let you go again. I shall bind you, if necessary, and carry you down
myself. How do you like this sofa to sleep on?” he added, panting, and
indicating a wide, soft divan opposite his own sofa, against the other
wall.
“Oh—anything will do for me!”
“Very well, you shall have this sofa. Here, take these things—here are
sheets, blankets, pillow” (Velchaninoff pulled all these things out of a
cupboard, and tossed them impatiently to Pavel Pavlovitch, who humbly
stood and received them); “now then, make your bed,—come, bustle up!”
Pavel Pavlovitch laden with bed clothes had been standing in the middle of
the room with a stupid drunken leer on his face, irresolute; but at
Velchaninoff’s second bidding he hurriedly began the task of making his
bed, moving the table away from in front of it, and smoothing a sheet over
the seat of the divan. Velchaninoff approached to help him. He was more or
less gratified with his guest’s alarm and submission.
“Now, drink up that wine and lie down!” was his next command. He felt that
he _must_ order this man about, he could not help himself. “I suppose you
took upon yourself to order this wine, did you?”
“I did—I did, sir! I sent for the wine, Alexey Ivanovitch, because I knew
_you_ would not send out again!”
“Well, it’s a good thing that you knew that; but I desire that you should
know still more. I give you notice that I have taken my own measures for
the future, I’m not going to put up with any more of your antics.”
“Oh, I quite understand, Alexey Ivanovitch, that that sort of thing could
only happen once!” said Pavel Pavlovitch, giggling feebly.
At this reply Velchaninoff, who had been marching up and down the room
stopped solemnly before Pavel Pavlovitch.
“Pavel Pavlovitch,” he said, “speak plainly! You are a clever fellow—I
admit the fact freely,—but I assure you you are going on a false track
now. Speak plainly, and act like an honest man, and I give you my word of
honour that I will answer all you wish to know.”
Pavel Pavlovitch grinned his disagreeable grin (which always drove
Velchaninoff wild) once more.
“Wait!” cried the latter. “No humbug now, please; I see through you. I
repeat that I give you my word of honour to reply candidly to anything you
may like to ask, and to give you every sort of satisfaction—reasonable or
even unreasonable—that you please. _Oh!_ how I wish I could make you
understand me!”
“Since you are so very kind,” began Pavel Pavlovitch, cautiously bending
towards him, “I may tell you that I am very much interested as to what you
said yesterday about ‘bird of prey’?”
Velchaninoff spat on the ground in utter despair and disgust, and
recommenced his walk up and down the room, quicker than ever.
“No, no, Alexey Ivanovitch, don’t spurn my question; you don’t know how
interested I am in it. I assure you I came here on purpose to ask you
about it. I know I’m speaking indistinctly, but you’ll forgive me that.
I’ve read the expression before. Tell me now, was Bagantoff a ‘bird of
prey,’ or—the other thing? How is one to distinguish one from the other?”
Velchaninoff went on walking up and down, and answered nothing for some
minutes.
“The bird of prey, sir,” he began suddenly, stopping in front of Pavel
Pavlovitch, and speaking vehemently, “is the man who would poison
Bagantoff while drinking champagne with him under the cloak of
goodfellowship, as you did with me yesterday, instead of escorting his
wretched body to the burial ground as you did—the deuce only knows why,
and with what dirty, mean, underhand, petty motives, which only recoil
upon yourself and make you viler than you already are. Yes, sir, recoil
upon yourself!”
“Quite so, quite so, I oughtn’t to have gone,” assented Pavel Pavlovitch,
“but aren’t you a little——”
“The bird of prey is not a man who goes and learns his grievance off by
heart, like a lesson, and whines it about the place, grimacing and posing,
and hanging it round other people’s necks, and who spends all his time in
such pettifogging. Is it true you wanted to hang yourself? Come, is it
true, or not?”
“I—I don’t know—I may have when I was drunk—I don’t remember. You see,
Alexey Ivanovitch, it wouldn’t be quite nice for me to go poisoning
people. I’m too high up in the service, and I have money, too, you
know—and I may wish to marry again, who knows.”
“Yes; you’d be sent to Siberia, which would be awkward.”
“Quite so; though they say the penal servitude is not so bad as it was.
But you remind me of an anecdote, Alexey Ivanovitch. I thought of it in
the carriage, and meant to tell you afterwards. Well! you may remember
Liftsoff at T——. He came while you were there. His younger brother—who is
rather a swell, too—was serving at L—— under the governor, and one fine
day he happened to quarrel with Colonel Golubenko in the presence of
ladies, and of one lady especially. Liftsoff considered himself insulted,
but concealed his grievance; and, meanwhile, Golubenko proposed to a
certain lady and was accepted. Would you believe it, Liftsoff made great
friends with Golubenko, and even volunteered to be best man at his
wedding. But when the ceremony was all over, and Liftsoff approached the
bridegroom to wish him joy and kiss him, as usual, he took the opportunity
of sticking a knife into Golubenko. Fancy! his own best man stuck him!
Well, what does the assassin do but run about the room crying. ‘Oh! what
have I done? Oh! what have I done?’ says he, and throws himself on
everyone’s neck by turns, ladies and all! Ha-ha-ha! He starved to death in
Siberia, sir! One is a little sorry for Golubenko; but he recovered, after
all.”
“I don’t understand why you told me that story,” said Velchaninoff,
frowning heavily.
“Why, because he stuck the other fellow with a knife,” giggled Pavel
Pavlovitch, “which proves that he was no type, but an ass of a fellow, who
could so forget the ordinary manners of society as to hang around ladies’
necks, and in the presence of the governor, too—and yet he stuck the other
fellow. Ha-ha-ha! He did what he intended to do, that’s all, sir!”
“Go to the devil, will you—you and your miserable humbug—you miserable
humbug yourself,” yelled Velchaninoff, wild with rage and fury, and
panting so that he could hardly get his words out. “You think you are
going to alarm _me_, do you, you frightener of children—you mean beast—you
low scoundrel you?—scoundrel—scoundrel—scoundrel!” He had quite forgotten
himself in his rage.
Pavel Pavlovitch shuddered all over; his drunkenness seemed to vanish in
an instant; his lips trembled and shook.
“Are you calling _me_ a scoundrel, Alexey Ivanovitch—_you_—_me_?”
But Velchaninoff was himself again now.
“I’ll apologise if you like,” he said, and relapsed into gloomy silence.
After a moment he added, “But only on condition that you yourself agree to
speak out fully, and at once.”
“In your place I should apologise unconditionally, Alexey Ivanovitch.”
“Very well; so be it then.” Velchaninoff was silent again for a while. “I
apologise,” he resumed; “but admit yourself, Pavel Pavlovitch, that I need
not feel myself in any way bound to you after this. I mean with regard to
_anything_—not only this particular matter.”
“All right! Why, what is there to settle between us?” laughed Pavel
Pavlovitch, without looking up.
“In that case, so much the better—so much the better. Come, drink up your
wine and get into bed, for I shall not let you go now, anyhow.”
“Oh, my wine—never mind my wine!” muttered Pavel Pavlovitch; but he went
to the table all the same, and took up his tumbler of champagne which had
long been poured out. Either he had been drinking copiously before, or
there was some other unknown cause at work, but his hand shook so as he
drank the wine that a quantity of it was spilled over his waistcoat and
the floor. However, he drank it all, to the last drop, as though he could
not leave the tumbler without emptying it. He then placed the empty glass
on the table, approached his bed, sat down on it, and began to undress.
“I think perhaps I had better _not_ sleep here,” he said suddenly, with
one boot off, and half undressed.
“Well, I _don’t_ think so,” said Velchaninoff, who was walking up and
down, without looking at him.
Pavel Pavlovitch finished undressing and lay down. A quarter of an hour
later Velchaninoff also got into bed, and put the candle out.
He soon began to doze uncomfortably. Some new trouble seemed to have
suddenly come over him and worried him, and at the same time he felt a
sensation of shame that he could allow himself to be worried by the new
trouble. Velchaninoff was just falling definitely asleep, however, when a
rustling sound awoke him. He immediately glanced at Pavel Pavlovitch’s
bed. The room was quite dark, the blinds being down and curtains drawn;
but it seemed to him that Pavel Pavlovitch was not lying in his bed; he
seemed to be sitting on the side of it.
“What’s the matter?” cried Velchaninoff.
“A ghost, sir,” said Pavel Pavlovitch, in a low tone, after a few moments
of silence.
“What? What sort of a ghost?”
“Th—there—in that room—just at the door, I seemed to see a ghost!”
“Whose ghost?” asked Velchaninoff, pausing a minute before putting the
question.
“Natalia Vasilievna’s!”
Velchaninoff jumped out of bed and walked to the door, whence he could see
into the room opposite, across the passage. There were no curtains in that
room, so that it was much lighter than his own.
“There’s nothing there at all. You are drunk; lie down again!” he said,
and himself set the example, rolling his blanket around him.
Pavel Pavlovitch said nothing, but lay down as he was told.
“Did you ever see any ghosts before?” asked Velchaninoff suddenly, ten
minutes later.
“I think I saw one once,” said Pavel Pavlovitch in the same low voice;
after which there was silence once more. Velchaninoff was not sure whether
he had been asleep or not, but an hour or so had passed, when suddenly he
was wide awake again. Was it a rustle that awoke him? He could not tell;
but one thing was evident—in the midst of the profound darkness of the
room something white stood before him; not quite close to him, but about
the middle of the room. He sat up in bed, and stared for a full minute.
“Is that you, Pavel Pavlovitch?” he asked. His voice sounded very weak.
There was no reply; but there was not the slightest doubt of the fact that
someone was standing there.
“Is that you, Pavel Pavlovitch?” cried Velchaninoff again, louder this
time; in fact, so loud that if the former had been asleep in bed he must
have started up and answered.
But there was no reply again. It seemed to Velchaninoff that the white
figure had approached nearer to him.
Then something strange happened; something seemed to “let go” within
Velchaninoff’s system, and he commenced to shout at the top of his voice,
just as he had done once before this evening, in the wildest and maddest
way possible, panting so that he could hardly articulate his words: “If
you—drunken ass that you are—dare to think that you could frighten _me_,
I’ll turn my face to the wall, and not look round once the whole night, to
show you how little I am afraid of you—a fool like you—if you stand there
from now till morning! I despise you!” So saying, Velchaninoff twisted
round with his face to the wall, rolled his blanket round him, and lay
motionless, as though turned to stone. A deathlike stillness supervened.
Did the ghost stand where it was, or had it moved? He could not tell; but
his heart beat, and beat, and beat—At least five minutes went by, and
then, not a couple of paces from his bed, there came the feeble voice of
Pavel Pavlovitch:
“I got up, Alexey Ivanovitch, to look for a little water. I couldn’t find
any, and was just going to look about nearer your bed——”
“Then why didn’t you answer when I called?” cried Velchaninoff angrily,
after a minute’s pause.
“I was frightened; you shouted so, you alarmed me!”
“You’ll find a caraffe and glass over there, on the little table. Light a
candle.”
“Oh, I’ll find it without. You’ll forgive me, Alexey Ivanovitch, for
frightening you so; I felt thirsty so suddenly.”
But Velchaninoff said nothing. He continued to lie with his face to the
wall, and so he lay all night, without turning round once. Was he anxious
to keep his word and show his contempt for Pavel Pavlovitch? He did not
know himself why he did it; his nervous agitation and perturbation were
such that he could not sleep for a long while, he felt quite delirious. At
last he fell asleep, and awoke at past nine o’clock next morning. He
started up just as though someone had struck him, and sat down on the side
of his bed. But Pavel Pavlovitch was not to be seen. His empty, rumpled
bed was there, but its occupant had flown before daybreak.
“I thought so!” cried Velchaninoff, bringing the palm of his right hand
smartly to his forehead.
The doctor’s anxiety was justified; Liza grew worse, so much so that it
was clear she was far more seriously ill than Velchaninoff and Claudia
Petrovna had thought the day before.
When the former arrived in the morning, Liza was still conscious, though
burning with fever. He assured his friend Claudia, afterwards, that the
child had smiled at him and held out her little hot hand. Whether she
actually did so, or whether he so much longed for her to do so that he
imagined it done, is uncertain.
By the evening, however, Liza was quite unconscious, and so she remained
during the whole of her illness. Ten days after her removal to the country
she died.
This was a sad period for Velchaninoff; the Pogoryeltseffs were quite
anxious on his account. He was with them for the greater part of the time,
and during the last few days of the little one’s illness, he used to sit
all alone for hours together in some corner, apparently thinking of
nothing. Claudia Petrovna would attempt to distract him but he hardly
answered her, and conversation was clearly painful to him. Claudia was
quite surprised that “all this” should affect him so deeply.
The children were the best consolation and distraction for him; with them
he could even laugh and play at intervals. Every hour, at least, he would
rise from his chair and creep on tip-toes to the sick-room to look at the
little invalid. Sometimes he imagined that she knew him; he had no hope
for her recovery—none of the family had any hope; but he never left the
precincts of the child’s chamber, sitting principally in the next room.
Twice, however, he had evinced great activity of a sudden; he had jumped
up and started off for town, where he had called upon all the most eminent
doctors of the place, and arranged consultations between them. The last
consultation was on the day before Liza’s death.
Claudia Petrovna had spoken seriously to him a day or two since, as to the
absolute necessity of hunting up Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky, because in
case of anything happening to Liza, she could not be buried without
certain documents from him.
Velchaninoff promised to write to him, and did write a couple of lines,
which he took to the Pokrofsky. Pavel Pavlovitch was not at home, as
usual, but he left the letter to the care of Maria Sisevna.
At last Liza died—on a lovely summer evening, just as the sun was setting;
and only then did Velchaninoff rouse himself.
When the little one was laid out, all covered with flowers, and dressed in
a fair white frock belonging to one of Claudia Petrovna’s children,
Velchaninoff came up to the lady of the house, and told her with flashing
eyes that he would now go and fetch the murderer. Regardless of all advice
to put off his search until to-morrow he started for town immediately.
He knew where to find Pavel Pavlovitch. He had not been in town
exclusively to find the doctors those two days. Occasionally, while
watching the dying child, he had been struck with the idea that if he
could only find and bring down Pavel Pavlovitch she might hear his voice
and be called back, as it were, from the darkness of delirium; at such
moments he had been seized with desperation, and twice he had started up
and driven wildly off to town in order to find Pavel Pavlovitch.
The latter’s room was the same as before, but it was useless to look for
him there, for, according to Maria Sisevna’s report, he was now two or
three days absent from home at a stretch, and was generally to be found
with some friends in the Voznecensky.
Arrived in town about ten o’clock, Velchaninoff went straight to these
latter people, and securing the services of a member of the family to
assist in finding Pavel Pavlovitch, set out on his quest. He did not know
what he should do with Pavel Pavlovitch when found, whether he should kill
him then and there, or simply inform him of the death of the child, and of
the necessity for his assistance in arranging for her funeral. After a
long and fruitless search Velchaninoff found Pavel Pavlovitch quite
accidentally; he was quarrelling with some person in the street—tipsy as
usual, and seemed to be getting the worst of the controversy, which
appeared to be about a money claim.
On catching sight of Velchaninoff, Pavel Pavlovitch stretched out his arms
to him and begged for help; while his opponent—observing Velchaninoff’s
athletic figure—made off. Pavel Pavlovitch shook his fist after him
triumphantly, and hooted at him with cries of victory; but this amusement
was brought to a sudden conclusion by Velchaninoff, who, impelled by some
mysterious motive—which he could not analyse, took him by the shoulders,
and began to shake him violently, so violently that his teeth chattered.
Pavel Pavlovitch ceased to shout after his opponent, and gazed with a
stupid tipsy expression of alarm at his new antagonist. Velchaninoff,
having shaken him till he was tired, and not knowing what to do next with
him, set him down violently on the pavement, backwards.
“Liza is dead!” he said.
Pavel Pavlovitch sat on the pavement and stared, he was too far gone to
take in the news. At last he seemed to realize.
“Dead!” he whispered, in a strange inexplicable tone. Velchaninoff was not
sure whether his face was simply twitching, or whether he was trying to
grin in his usual disagreeable way; but the next moment the drunkard
raised his shaking hand to cross himself. He then struggled to his feet
and staggered off, appearing totally oblivious of the fact that such a
person as Velchaninoff existed.
However, the latter very soon pursued and caught him, seizing him once
more by the shoulder.
“Do you understand, you drunken sot, that without you the funeral
arrangements cannot be made?” he shouted, panting with rage.
Pavel Pavlovitch turned his head.
“The artillery—lieutenant—don’t you remember him?” he muttered, thickly.
“_What?_” cried Velchaninoff, with a shudder.
“He’s her father—find him! he’ll bury her!”
“You liar! You said that out of pure malice. I thought you’d invent
something of the sort!”
Quite beside himself with passion Velchaninoff brought down his powerful
fist with all his strength on Pavel Pavlovitch’s head; another moment and
he might have followed up the blow and slain the man as he stood. His
victim never winced, but he turned upon Velchaninoff a face of such insane
terrible passion, that his whole visage looked distorted.
“Do you understand Russian?” he asked more firmly, as though his fury had
chased away the effects of drunkenness. “Very well, then, you are a——!”
(here followed a specimen of the very vilest language which the Russian
tongue could furnish); “and now you can go back to her!” So saying he tore
himself from Velchaninoff’s grasp, nearly knocking himself over with the
effort, and staggered away. Velchaninoff did not follow him.
Next day, however, a most respectable-looking middle-aged man arrived at
the Pogoryeltseft’s house, in civil uniform, and handed to Claudia
Petrovna a packet addressed to her “from Pavel Pavlovitch Trusotsky.”
In this packet was a sum of three hundred roubles, together with all
certificates necessary for Liza’s funeral. Pavel Pavlovitch had written a
short note couched in very polite and correct phraseology, and thanking
Claudia Petrovna sincerely “for her great kindness to the orphan—kindness
for which heaven alone could recompense her.” He added rather confusedly
that severe illness prevented his personal presence at the funeral of his
“tenderly loved and unfortunate daughter,” but that he “felt he could
repose all confidence (as to the ceremony being fittingly performed) in
the angelic goodness of Claudia Petrovna.” The three hundred roubles, he
explained, were to go towards the funeral and other expenses. If there
should be any of the money left after defraying all charges, Claudia
Petrovna was requested to spend the same in prayers for the repose of the
soul of the deceased.
Nothing further was to be discovered by questioning the messenger; and it
was soon evident that the latter knew nothing, excepting that he had only
consented to act as bearer of the packet, in response to the urgent appeal
of Pavel Pavlovitch.
Pogoryeltseff was a little offended by the offer of money for expenses,
and would have sent it back, but Claudia Petrovna suggested that a receipt
should be taken from the cemetery authorities for the cost of the funeral
(since one could not well refuse to allow a man to bury his own child),
together with a document undertaking that the rest of the three hundred
roubles should be spent in prayer for the soul of Liza.
Velchaninoff afterwards posted an envelope containing these two papers to
Trusotsky’s lodging.
After the funeral Velchaninoff disappeared from the country altogether. He
wandered about town for a whole fortnight, knocking up against people as
he went blindly through the streets. Now and then he spent a whole day
lying in his bed, oblivious of the most ordinary needs and occupations;
the Pogoryeltseffs often invited him to their house, and he invariably
promised to come, and as invariably forgot all about it. Claudia Petrovna
went as far as to call for him herself, but she did not find him at home.
The same thing happened with his lawyer, who had some good news to tell
him. The difference with his opponent had been settled advantageously for
Velchaninoff, the former having accepted a small bonification and
renounced his claim to the property in dispute. All that was wanting was
the formal acquiescence of Velchaninoff himself.
Finding him at home at last, after many endeavours, the lawyer was
excessively surprised to discover that Velchaninoff was as callous and
cool as to the result of his (the lawyer’s) labours, as he had before been
ardent and excitable.
The hottest days of July had now arrived, but Velchaninoff was oblivious
of everything. His grief swelled and ached at his heart like some internal
boil; his greatest sorrow was that Liza had not had time to know him, and
died without ever guessing how fondly he loved her. The sweet new beacon
of his life, which had glimmered for a short while within his heart, was
extinguished once more, and lost in eternal gloom.
The whole object of his existence, as he now told himself at every moment,
should have been that Liza might feel his love about her and around her,
each day, each hour, each moment of her life.
“There can be no higher aim or object than this in life,” he thought, in
gloomy ecstasy. “If there be other aims in life, none can be holier or
better than this of mine. All my old unworthy life should have been
purified and atoned for by my love for Liza; in place of myself—my sinful,
worn-out, useless life—I should have bequeathed to the world a sweet,
pure, beautiful being, in whose innocence all my guilt should have been
absorbed, and lost, and forgiven, and in her I should have forgiven
myself.”
Such thoughts would flit through Velchaninoff’s head as he mused
sorrowfully over the memory of the dead child. He thought over all he had
seen of her; he recalled her little face all burning with fever, then
lying at rest in her coffin, covered with lovely flowers. He remembered
that once he had noticed that one of her fingers was quite black from some
bruise or pinch—goodness knows what had made it so, but it was the sight
of that little finger which had filled him with longing to go straight
away and _murder_ Pavel Pavlovitch.
“Do you know what Liza is to me?” Pavel had said, he recollected, one day;
and now he understood the exclamation. It was no pretence of love, no
posturing and nonsense—it was real love! How, then, could the wretch have
been so cruel to a child whom he so dearly loved? He could not bear to
think of it, the question was painful, and quite unanswerable.
One day he wandered down—he knew not exactly how—to the cemetery where
Liza was buried, and hunted up her grave. This was the first time he had
been there since the funeral; he had never dared to go there before,
fearing that the visit would be too painful. But strangely enough, when he
found the little mound and had bent down and kissed it, he felt happier
and lighter at heart than before.
It was a lovely evening, the sun was setting, the tall grass waved about
the tombs, and a bee hummed somewhere near him. The flowers and crosses
placed on the tomb by Claudia Petrovna were still there. A ray of hope
blazed up in his heart for the first time for many a long day. “How
light-hearted I feel,” he thought, as he felt the spell of the quiet of
God’s Acre, and the hush of the beautiful still evening. A flow of some
indefinable faith in something poured into his heart.
“This is Liza’s gift,” he thought; “this is Liza herself talking to me!”
It was quite dark when he left the cemetery and turned his steps
homewards.
Not far from the gate of the burial ground there stood a small inn or
public-house, and through the open windows he could see the people inside
sitting at tables. It instantly struck Velchaninoff that one of the
guests, sitting nearest to the window, was Pavel Pavlovitch, and that the
latter had seen him and was observing him curiously.
He went on further, but before very long he heard footsteps pursuing him.
It was, of course, Pavel Pavlovitch. Probably the unusually serene and
peaceful expression of Velchaninoff’s face as he went by had attracted and
encouraged him.
He soon caught Velchaninoff up, and smiled timidly at him, but not with
the old drunken grin. He did not appear to be in the smallest degree
drunk.
“Good evening,” said Pavel Pavlovitch.
“How d’ye do?” replied Velchaninoff.
By replying thus to Pavel Pavlovitch’s greeting Velchaninoff surprised
himself. It seemed strange indeed to him that he should now meet this man
without any feeling of anger, and that there should be something quite
novel in his feelings towards Pavel Pavlovitch—a sort of call to new
relations with him.
“What a lovely evening!” said Pavel Pavlovitch, looking observantly into
the other’s eyes.
“So you haven’t gone away yet!” murmured Velchaninoff, not in a tone of
inquiry, but as though musing upon the fact as he continued to walk on.
“I’ve been a good deal delayed; but I’ve obtained my petition, my new
post, with rise of salary. I’m off the day after to-morrow for certain.”
“What? You’ve obtained the new situation?”
“And why not?” said Pavel Pavlovitch, with a crooked smile.
“Oh, I meant nothing particular by my remark!” said Velchaninoff frowning,
and glancing sidelong at his companion. To his surprise Pavel Pavlovitch,
both in dress and appearance, even down to the hat with the crape band,
was incomparably neater and tidier-looking than he was wont to be a
fortnight since.
“Why was he sitting in the public-house then?” thought Velchaninoff. This
fact puzzled him much.
“I wished to let you know of my other great joy, Alexey Ivanovitch!”
resumed Pavel.
“Joy?”
“I’m going to marry.”
“What?”
“Yes, sir! after sorrow, joy! It is ever thus in life. Oh! Alexey
Ivanovitch, I should so much like if—but you look as though you were in a
great hurry.”
“Yes, I am in a hurry, and I am ill besides.” He felt as though he would
give anything to get rid of the man; the feeling of readiness to develop
new and better relations with him had vanished in a moment.
“I should so much like——”
Pavel Pavlovitch did not finish his sentence; Velchaninoff kept silence
and waited.
“In that case, perhaps another time—if we should happen to meet.”
“Yes, yes, another time,” said Velchaninoff quickly, continuing to move
along, and never looking at his companion.
Nothing was said for another minute or two. Pavel Pavlovitch continued to
trot alongside.
“In that case, _au revoir_,” he blurted, at last. “_Au revoir!_ I hope——”
Velchaninoff did not think it necessary to hear him complete his sentence;
he left Pavel, and returned home much agitated. The meeting with “that
fellow” had been too much for his present state of mind. As he lay down
upon his bed the thought came over him once more: “Why was that fellow
there, close to the cemetery?” He determined to go down to the
Pogoryeltseffs’ next morning; not that he felt inclined to go—any sympathy
was intolerably painful to him,—but they had been so kind and so anxious
about him, that he must really make up his mind to go. But next day, while
finishing his breakfast, he felt terribly disinclined for the visit; he
felt, as it were, shy of meeting them for the first time after his grief.
“Shall I go or not?” he was saying to himself, as he sat at his table.
When suddenly, to his extreme amazement, in walked Pavel Pavlovitch.
In spite of yesterday’s _rencontre_, Velchaninoff could not have believed
that this man would ever enter his rooms again; and when he now saw him
appear, he gazed at him in such absolute astonishment, that he simply did
not know what to say. But Pavel Pavlovitch took the management of the
matter into his own hands; he said “good morning,” and sat down in the
very same chair which he had occupied on his last visit, three weeks
since.
This circumstance reminded Velchaninoff too painfully of that visit, and
he glared at his visitor with disgust and some agitation.
“You are surprised, I see!” said Pavel Pavlovitch, reading the other’s
expression.
He seemed to be both freer, more at his ease, and yet more timid than
yesterday. His outward appearance was very curious to behold; for Pavel
Pavlovitch was not only _neatly_ dressed, he was “got up” in the pink of
fashion. He had on a neat summer overcoat, with a pair of light trousers
and a white waistcoat; his gloves, his gold eye-glasses (quite a new
acquisition), and his linen were quite above all criticism; he wafted an
odour of sweet scent when he moved. He looked funny, but his appearance
awakened strange thoughts besides.
“Of course I have surprised you, Alexey Ivanovitch,” he said, twisting
himself about; “I see it. But in my opinion there should be a something
exalted, something higher—untouched and unattainable by petty discords, or
the ordinary conditions of life, between man and man. Don’t you agree with
me, sir?”
“Pavel Pavlovitch, say what you have to say as quickly as you can, and
without further ceremony,” said Velchaninoff, frowning angrily.
“In a couple of words, sir,” said Pavel, hurriedly, “I am going to be
married, and I am now off to see my bride—at once. She lives in the
country; and what I desire is, the profound honour of introducing _you_ to
the family, sir; in fact, I have come here to petition you, sir” (Pavel
Pavlovitch bent his head deferentially)—“to beg you to go down with me.”
“Go down with you? Where to?” cried the other, his eyes starting out of
his head.
“To their house in the country, sir. Forgive me, my dear sir, if I am too
agitated, and confuse my words; but I am so dreadfully afraid of hearing
you refuse me.”
He looked at Velchaninoff plaintively.
“You wish me to accompany you to see your bride?” said Velchaninoff,
staring keenly at Pavel Pavlovitch; he could not believe either his eyes
or his ears.
“Yes—yes, sir!” murmured Pavel, who had suddenly become timid to a painful
degree. “Don’t be angry, Alexey Ivanovitch, it is not my audacity that
prompts me to ask you this; I do it with all humility, and conscious of
the unusual nature of my petition. I—I thought perhaps you would not
refuse my humble request.”
“In the first place, the thing is absolutely out of the question,” said
Velchaninoff, turning away in considerable mental perturbation.
“It is only my immeasurable longing that prompts me to ask you. I confess
I have a reason for desiring it, which reason I propose to reveal to you
afterwards; just now I——”
“The thing is quite impossible, however you may look at it. You must admit
yourself that it is so!” cried Velchaninoff. Both men had risen from their
chairs in the excitement of the conversation.
“Not at all—not at all; it is quite possible, sir. In the first place, I
merely propose to introduce you as my friend; and in the second place, you
know the family already, the Zachlebnikoff’s—State Councillor
Zachlebnikoff!”
“What? how so?” cried Velchaninoff. This was the very man whom he had so
often tried to find at home, and whom he never succeeded in hunting
down—the very lawyer who had acted for his adversary in the late legal
proceedings.
“Why, certainly—certainly!” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, apparently taking
heart at Velchaninoff’s extreme display of amazement. “The very same man
whom I saw you talking to in the street one day; when I watched you from
the other side of the road, I was waiting my turn to speak to him then. We
served in the same department twelve years since. I had no thought of all
this that day I saw you with him; the whole idea is quite new and
sudden—only a week old.”
“But—excuse me; why, surely this is a most respectable family, isn’t it?”
asked Velchaninoff, naïvely.
“Well, and what if it is respectable?” said Pavel, with a twist.
“Oh, no—of course, I meant nothing; but, so far as I could judge from what
I saw, there——”
“They remember—they remember your coming down,” cried Pavel delightedly.
“I told them all sorts of flattering things about you.”
“But, look here, how are you to marry within three months of your late
wife’s death?”
“Oh! the wedding needn’t be at once. The wedding can come off in nine or
ten months, so that I shall have been in mourning exactly a year. Believe
me, my dear sir, it’s all most charming—first place, Fedosie Petrovitch
has known me since I was a child; he knew my late wife; he knows how much
income I have; he knows all about my little private capital, and all about
my new increase of salary. So that you see the whole thing is a mere
matter of weights and scales.”
“Is she a daughter of his, then?”
“I’ll tell you all about it,” said Pavel, licking his lips with pleasure.
“May I smoke a cigarette? Now, you see, men like Fedosie Petrovitch
Zachlebnikoff are much valued in the State; but, excepting for a few
perquisites allowed them, the pay is wretched; they live well enough, but
they cannot possibly lay by money. Now, imagine, this man has eight
daughters and only one little boy: if he were to die there would be
nothing but a wretched little pension to keep the lot of them. Just
imagine now—_boots_ alone for such a family, eh? Well, out of these eight
girls five are marriageable, the eldest is twenty-four already (a splendid
girl, she is, you shall see her for yourself). The sixth is a girl of
fifteen, still at school. Well, all those five elder girls have to be
trotted about and shown off, and what does all that sort of thing cost the
poor father, sir? They must be married. Then suddenly I appear on the
scene—the first probable bridegroom in the family, and they all know that
I have money. Well, there you are, sir—the thing’s done.”
Pavel Pavlovitch was intoxicated with enthusiasm.
“Are you engaged to the eldest?”
“N—no;—not the eldest. I am wooing the sixth girl, the one at school.”
“What?” cried Velchaninoff, laughing in spite of himself. “Why, you say
yourself she’s only fifteen years old.”
“Fifteen _now_, sir; but she’ll be sixteen in nine months—sixteen and
three months—so why not? It wouldn’t be quite nice to make the engagement
public just yet, though; so there’s to be nothing formal at present, it’s
only a private arrangement between the parents and myself so far. Believe
me, my dear sir, the whole thing is apple-pie, regular and charming.”
“Then it isn’t quite settled yet?”
“Oh, _quite_ settled—quite settled. Believe me, it’s all as right and
tight as——”
“Does _she_ know?”
“Well, you see, just for form’s sake, it is not actually talked about—to
her I mean,—but she _knows_ well enough. Oh! now you _will_ make me happy
this once, Alexey Ivanovitch, won’t you?” he concluded, with extreme
timidity of voice and manner.
“But why should _I_ go with you? However,” added Velchaninoff impatiently,
“as I am not going in any case, I don’t see why I should hear any reasons
you may adduce for my accompanying you.”
“Alexey Ivanovitch!——”
“Oh, come! you don’t suppose I am going to sit down in a carriage with you
alongside, and drive down there! Come, just think for yourself!”
The feeling of disgust and displeasure which Pavel Pavlovitch had awakened
in him before, had now started into life again after the momentary
distraction of the man’s foolery about his bride. He felt that in another
minute or two he might kick the fellow out before he realized what he was
doing. He felt angry with himself for some reason or other.
“Sit down, Alexey Ivanovitch, sit down! You shall not repent it!” said
Pavel Pavlovitch in a wheedling voice. “No, no, no!” he added, deprecating
the impatient gesture which Velchaninoff made at this moment. “Alexey
Ivanovitch, I entreat you to pause before you decide definitely. I see you
have quite misunderstood me. I quite realize that I am not for you, nor
you for me! I am not quite so absurd as to be unaware of that fact. The
service I ask of you now shall not compromise you in any way for the
future. I am going away the day after to-morrow, for certain; let this one
day be an exceptional one for me, sir. I came to you founding my hopes
upon the generosity and nobility of your heart, Alexey Ivanovitch—upon
those special tender feelings which may, perhaps, have been aroused in you
by late events. Am I explaining myself clearly, sir; or do you still
misunderstand me?”
The agitation of Pavel Pavlovitch was increasing with every moment.
Velchaninoff gazed curiously at him.
“You ask a service of me,” he said thoughtfully, “and insist strongly upon
my performance of it. This is very suspicious, in my opinion; I must know
more.”
“The whole service I ask is merely that you will come with me; and I
promise, when we return that I will lay bare my heart to you as though we
were at a confessional. Trust me this once, Alexey Ivanovitch!”
But Velchaninoff still held out, and the more obstinately because he was
conscious of a certain worrying feeling which he had had ever since Pavel
Pavlovitch began to talk about his bride. Whether this feeling was simple
curiosity, or something quite inexplicable, he knew not. Whatever it was
it urged him to agree, and go. And the more the instinct urged him, the
more he resisted it.
He sat and thought for a long time, his head resting on his hand, while
Pavel Pavlovitch buzzed about him and continued to repeat his arguments.
“Very well,” he said at last, “very well, I’ll go.” He was agitated almost
to trembling pitch. Pavel was radiant.
“Then, Alexey Ivanovitch, change your clothes—dress up, will you? Dress up
in your own style—you know so well how to do it.”
Pavel Pavlovitch danced about Velchaninoff as he dressed. His state of
mind was exuberantly blissful.
“What in the world does the fellow mean by it all?” thought Velchaninoff.
“I’m going to ask you one more favour yet, Alexey Ivanovitch,” cried the
other. “You’ve consented to come; you must be my guide, sir, too.”
“For instance, how?”
“Well, for instance, here’s an important question—the crape. Which ought I
to do—tear it off, or leave it on?”
“Just as you like.”
“No, I want your opinion. What should you do yourself, if you were wearing
crape, under the circumstances? My own idea was, that if I left it on, I
should be giving a proof of the fidelity of my affections. A very
flattering recommendation, eh, sir?”
“Oh, take it off, of course.”
“Do you really think it’s a matter of ’of course’?” Pavel Pavlovitch
reflected. “No,” he continued, “do you know, I think I’d rather leave it
on.”
“Well, do as you like! He doesn’t trust me, at all events, which is one
good thing,” thought Velchaninoff.
They left the house at last. Pavel looked over his companion’s smart
costume with intense satisfaction. Velchaninoff was greatly surprised at
Pavel’s conduct, but not less so at his own. At the gate there stood a
very superior open carriage.
“H’m! so you had a carriage in waiting, had you? Then you were quite
convinced that I would consent to come down with you, I suppose?”
“I took the carriage for my own use, but I was nearly sure you would
come,” said Pavel Pavlovitch, who wore the air of a man whose cup of
happiness is full to the brim.
“Don’t you think you are a little too sanguine in trusting so much to my
benevolence?” asked Velchaninoff, as they took their seats and started. He
smiled as he spoke, but his heart was full of annoyance.
“Well, Alexey Ivanovitch, it is not for _you_ to call me a fool for that,”
replied Pavel, firmly and impressively.
“H’m! and Liza?” thought Velchaninoff, but he chased the idea away, he
felt as though it were sacrilege to think of her here; and immediately
another thought came in, namely, how small, how petty a creature he must
be himself to harbour such a thought—such a mean, paltry sentiment in
connection with Liza’s sacred name. So angry was he, that he felt as
though he must stop the carriage and get out, even though it cost him a
struggle with Pavel Pavlovitch to do so.
But at this moment Pavel spoke, and the old feeling of desire to go with
him re-entered his soul. “Alexey Ivanovitch,” Pavel said, “are you a judge
of articles of value?”
“What sort of articles?”
“Diamonds.”
“Yes.”
“I wish to take down a present with me. What do you think? Ought I to give
her one, or not?”
“Quite unnecessary, I should think.”
“But I wish to do it, badly. The only thing is, what shall I give?—a whole
set, brooch, ear-rings, bracelet, and all, or only one article?”
“How much do you wish to spend?”
“Oh, four or five hundred roubles.”
“Bosh!”
“What, too much?”
“Buy one bracelet for about a hundred.”
This advice depressed Pavel Pavlovitch; he grew wondrous melancholy. He
was terribly anxious to spend a lot of money, and buy the whole set. He
insisted upon the necessity of doing so.
A shop was reached and entered, and Pavel bought a bracelet after all, and
that not the one he chose himself, but the one which his companion fixed
upon. Pavel wished to buy both. When the shopman, who originally asked one
hundred and seventy five, let the bracelet go for a hundred and fifty
roubles, Pavel Pavlovitch was anything but pleased. He was most anxious to
spend a lot of money on the young lady, and would have gladly paid two
hundred roubles for the same goods, on the slightest encouragement.
“It doesn’t matter, my being in a hurry to give her presents, does it?” he
began excitedly, when they were back in the carriage, and rolling along
once more. “They are not ‘swells’ at all; they live most simply. Innocence
loves presents,” he continued, smiling cunningly. “You laughed just now,
Alexey Ivanovitch, when I said that the girl was only fifteen; but, you
know, what specially struck me about her was, that she still goes to
school, with a sweet little bag in her hand, containing copy books and
pencils. Ha-ha-ha! It was the little satchel that ‘fetched’ me. I do love
innocence, Alexey Ivanovitch. I don’t care half so much for good looks as
for innocence. Fancy, she and her friend were sitting in the corner there,
the other day, and roared with laughter because the cat jumped from a
cupboard on to the sofa, and fell down all of a heap. Why, it smells of
fresh apples, that does, sir. Shall I take off the crape, eh?”
“Do as you like!”
“Well, I’ll take it off!” He took his hat, tore the crape off, and threw
the latter into the road.
Velchaninoff remarked that as he put his hat on his bald head once more,
he wore an expression of the simplest and frankest hope and delight.
“Is he _really_ that sort of man?” thought Velchaninoff with annoyance.
“He surely _can’t_ be trundling me down here without some underhand
motive—impossible! He _can’t_ be trusting entirely to my generosity?” This
last idea seemed to fill him with indignation. “What _is_ this clown of a
fellow?” he continued to reflect. “Is he a fool, an idiot, or simply a
‘permanent husband’? I can’t make head or tail of it all!”
The Zachlebnikoffs were certainly, as Velchaninoff had expressed it, a
most respectable family. Zachlebnikoff himself was a most eminently
dignified and “solid” gentleman to look at. What Pavel Pavlovitch had said
as to their resources was, however, quite true; they lived well, but if
paterfamilias were to die, it would be very awkward for the rest.
Old Zachlebnikoff received Velchaninoff most cordially. He was no longer
the legal opponent; he appeared now in a far more agreeable guise.
“I congratulate you,” he said at once, “upon the issue. I did my best to
arrange it so, and your lawyer was a capital fellow to deal with. You have
your sixty thousand without trouble or worry, you see; and if we hadn’t
squared it we might have fought on for two or three years.”
Velchaninoff was introduced to the lady of the house as well—an elderly,
simple-looking, worn woman. Then the girls began to troop in, one by one
and occasionally two together. But, somehow, there seemed to be even more
than Velchaninoff had been led to expect; ten or a dozen were collected
already—he could not count them exactly. It turned out that some were
friends from the neighbouring houses.
The Zachlebnikoffs’ country house was a large wooden structure of no
particular style of architecture, but handsome enough, and was possessed
of a fine large garden. There were, however, two or three other houses
built round the latter, so that the garden was common property for all,
which fact resulted in great intimacy between the Zachlebnikoff girls and
the young ladies of the neighbouring houses.
Velchaninoff discovered, almost from the first moment, that his arrival—in
the capacity of Pavel Pavlovitch’s friend, desiring an introduction to the
family—was expected, and looked forward to as a solemn and important
occasion.
Being an expert in such matters he very soon observed that there was even
more than this in his reception. Judging from the extra politeness of the
parents, and by the exceeding smartness of the young ladies, he could not
help suspecting that Pavel Pavlovitch had been improving the occasion, and
that he had—not, of course, in so many words—given to understand that
Velchaninoff was a single man—dull and disconsolate, and had represented
him as likely enough at any moment to change his manner of living and set
up an establishment, especially as he had just come in for a considerable
inheritance. He thought that Katerina Fedosievna, the eldest
girl—twenty-four years of age, and a splendid girl according to Pavel’s
description—seemed rather “got up to kill,” from the look of her. She was
eminent, even among her well-dressed sisters, for special elegance of
costume, and for a certain originality about the make-up of her abundant
hair.
The rest of the girls all looked as though they were well aware that
Velchaninoff was making acquaintance with the family “for Katie,” and had
come down “to have a look at her.” Their looks and words all strengthened
the impression that they were acting with this supposition in view, as the
day went on.
Katerina Fedosievna was a fine tall girl, rather plump, and with an
extremely pleasing face. She seemed to be of a quiet, if not actually
sleepy, disposition.
“Strange, that such a fine girl should be unmarried,” thought
Velchaninoff, as he watched her with much satisfaction.
All the sisters were nice-looking, and there were several pretty faces
among the friends assembled. Velchaninoff was much diverted by the
presence of all these young ladies.
Nadejda Fedosievna, the school-girl and bride elect of Pavel Pavlovitch,
had not as yet condescended to appear. Velchaninoff awaited her coming
with a degree of impatience which surprised and amused him. At last she
came, and came with effect, too, accompanied by a lively girl, her
friend—Maria Nikitishna—who was considerably older than herself and a very
old friend of the family, having been governess in a neighbouring house
for some years. She was quite one of the family, and boasted of about
twenty-three years of age. She was much esteemed by all the girls, and
evidently acted at present as guide, philosopher, and friend to Nadia
(Nadejda). Velchaninoff saw at the first glance that all the girls were
against Pavel Pavlovitch, friends and all; and when Nadia came in, it did
not take him long to discover that she absolutely _hated_ him. He
observed, further, that Pavel Pavlovitch either did not, or _would not_,
notice this fact.
Nadia was the prettiest of all the girls—a little _brunette_, with an
impudent audacious expression; she might have been a Nihilist from the
independence of her look. The sly little creature had a pair of flashing
eyes and a most charming smile, though as often as not her smile was more
full of mischief and wickedness than of amiability; her lips and teeth
were wonders; she was slender but well put together, and the expression of
her face was thoughtful though at the same time childish.
“Fifteen years old” was imprinted in every feature of her face and every
motion of her body. It appeared afterwards that Pavel Pavlovitch had
actually seen the girl for the first time with a little satchel in her
hand, coming back from school. She had ceased to carry the satchel since
that day.
The present brought down by Pavel Pavlovitch proved a failure, and was the
cause of a very painful impression.
Pavel Pavlovitch no sooner saw his bride elect enter the room than he
approached her with a broad grin on his face. He gave his present with the
preface that he “offered it in recognition of the agreeable sensation
experienced by him at his last visit upon the occasion of Nadejda
Fedosievna singing a certain song to the pianoforte,” and there he stopped
in confusion and stood before her lost and miserable, shoving the
jeweller’s box into her hand. Nadia, however, would not take the present,
and drew her hands away.
She approached her mother imperiously (the latter looked much put out),
and said aloud: “I won’t take it, mother.” Nadia was blushing with shame
and anger.
“Take it and say ‘thank you’ to Pavel Pavlovitch for it,” said her father
quietly but firmly. He was very far from pleased.
“Quite unnecessary, quite unnecessary!” he muttered to Pavel Pavlovitch.
Nadia, seeing there was nothing else to be done, took the case and
curtsied—just as children do, giving a little bob down and then a bob up
again, as if she had been on springs.
One of the sisters came across to look at the present whereupon Nadia
handed it over to her unopened, thereby showing that she did not care so
much as to look at it herself.
The bracelet was taken out and handed around from one to the other of the
company; but all examined it silently, and some even ironically, only the
mother of the family muttered that the bracelet was “very pretty.”
Pavel Pavlovitch would have been delighted to see the earth open and
swallow him up.
Velchaninoff helped the wretched man out of the mess. He suddenly began to
talk loudly and eloquently about the first thing that struck him, and
before five minutes had passed he had won the attention of everyone in the
room. He was a wonderfully clever society talker. He had the knack of
putting on an air of absolute sincerity, and of impressing his hearers
with the belief that he considered them equally sincere; he was able to
act the simple, careless, and happy young fellow to perfection. He was a
master of the art of interlarding his talk with occasional flashes of real
wit, apparently spontaneous but actually pre-arranged, and very likely
_stale_, in so far that he had himself made the joke before.
But to-day he was particularly successful; he felt that he must talk on
and talk well, and he knew that before many moments were past he should
succeed in monopolizing all eyes and all ears—that no joke should be
laughed at but his own, and no voice heard but his.
And sure enough the spell of his presence seemed to produce a wonderful
effect; in a while the talking and laughter became general, with
Velchaninoff as the centre and motor of all. Mrs. Zachlebnikoff’s kind
face lighted up with real pleasure, and Katie’s pretty eyes were alight
with absolute fascination, while her whole visage glowed with delight.
Only Nadia frowned at him, and watched him keenly from beneath her dark
lashes. It was clear that she was prejudiced against him. This last fact
only roused Velchaninoff to greater exertions. The mischievous Maria
Nikitishna, however, as Nadia’s ally, succeeded in playing off a
successful piece of chaff against Velchaninoff; she pretended that Pavel
Pavlovitch had represented Velchaninoff as the friend of his childhood,
thereby making the latter out to be some seven or eight years older than
he really was. Velchaninoff liked the look of Maria, notwithstanding.
Pavel Pavlovitch was the picture of perplexity. He quite understood the
success which his “friend” was achieving, and at first he felt glad and
proud of that success, laughing at the jokes and taking a share of the
conversation; but for some reason or other he gradually relapsed into
thoughtfulness, and thence into melancholy—which fact was sufficiently
plain from the expression of his lugubrious and careworn physiognomy.
“Well, my dear fellow, you are the sort of guest one need not exert
oneself to entertain,” said old Zachlebnikoff at last, rising and making
for his private study, where he had business of importance awaiting his
attention; “and I was led to believe that you were the most morose of
hypochondriacs. Dear me! what mistakes one does make about other people,
to be sure!”
There was a grand piano in the room, and Velchaninoff suddenly turned to
Nadia and remarked:
“You sing, don’t you?”
“Who told you I did?” said Nadia curtly.
“Pavel Pavlovitch.”
“It isn’t true; I only sing for a joke—I have no voice.”
“Oh, but I have no voice either, and yet I sing!”
“Well, you sing to us first, and then I’ll sing,” said Nadia, with
sparkling eyes; “not now though—after dinner. I hate music,” she added,
“I’m so sick of the piano. We have singing and strumming going on all day
here;—and Katie is the only one of us all worth hearing!”
Velchaninoff immediately attacked Katie, and besieged her with petitions
to play. This attention from him to her eldest daughter so pleased mamma
that she flushed up with satisfaction.
Katie went to the piano, blushing like a school-girl, and evidently much
ashamed of herself for blushing; she played some little piece of Haydn’s
correctly enough but without much expression.
When she had finished Velchaninoff praised the music warmly—Haydn’s music
generally, and this little piece in particular. He looked at Katie too,
with admiration, and his expression seemed to say. “By Jove, you’re a fine
girl!” So eloquent was his look that everyone in the room was able to read
it, and especially Katie herself.
“What a pretty garden you have!” said Velchaninoff after a short pause,
looking through the glass doors of the balcony. “Let’s all go out; may
we?”
“Oh, yes! do let’s go out!” cried several voices together. He seemed to
have hit upon the very thing most desired by all.
So they all adjourned into the garden, and walked about there until
dinner-time; and Velchaninoff had the opportunity of making closer
acquaintance with some of the girls of the establishment. Two or three
young fellows “dropped in” from the neighbouring houses—a student, a
school-boy, and another young fellow of about twenty in a pair of huge
spectacles. Each of these young fellows immediately attached himself to
the particular young lady of his choice.
The young man in spectacles no sooner arrived than he went aside with
Nadia and Maria Nikitishna, and entered into an animated whispering
conversation with them, with much frowning and impatience of manner.
This gentleman seemed to consider it his mission to treat Pavel Pavlovitch
with the most ineffable contempt.
Some of the girls proposed a game. One of them suggested “Proverbs,” but
it was voted dull; another suggested acting, but the objection was made
that they never knew how to finish off.
“It may be more successful with you,” said Nadia to Velchaninoff
confidentially. “You know we all thought you were Pavel Pavlovitch’s
friend, but it appears that he was only boasting. I am _very_ glad you
have come—for a certain reason!” she added, looking knowingly into
Velchaninoff’s face, and then retreating back again to Maria’s wing,
blushing.
“We’ll play ‘Proverbs’ in the evening,” said another, “and we’ll all chaff
Pavel Pavlovitch; _you_ must help us too!”
“We _are_ so glad you’re come—it’s so dull here as a rule,” said a third,
a funny-looking red-haired girl, whose face was comically hot, with
running apparently. Goodness knows where she had dropped from;
Velchaninoff had not observed her arrive.
Pavel Pavlovitch’s agitation increased every moment. Meanwhile
Velchaninoff took the opportunity of making great friends with Nadia. She
had ceased to frown at him as before, and had now developed the wildest of
spirits, dancing and jumping about, singing and whistling, and
occasionally even catching hold of his hand in her innocent friendliness.
She was very happy indeed, apparently; but she took no more notice of
Pavel Pavlovitch than if he had not been there at all.
Pavel Pavlovitch was very jealous of all this, and once or twice when
Nadia and Velchaninoff talked apart, he joined them and rudely interrupted
their conversation by interposing his anxious face between them.
Katia could not help being fully aware by this time that their charming
guest had not come in for her sake, as had been believed by the family;
indeed, it was clear that Nadia interested him so much that she excluded
everyone else, to a considerable extent, from his attention. However, in
spite of this, her good-natured face retained its amiability of expression
all the same. She seemed to be happy enough witnessing the happiness of
the rest and listening to the merry talk; she could not take a large share
in the conversation herself, poor girl!
“What a fine girl your sister, Katerina Fedosievna is,” remarked
Velchaninoff to Nadia.
“Katia? I should think so! there is no better girl in the world. She’s our
family angel! I’m in love with her myself!” replied Nadia
enthusiastically.
At last, dinner was announced, and a very good dinner it was, several
courses being added for the benefit of the guests: a bottle of tokay made
its appearance, and champagne was handed round in honour of the occasion.
The good humour of the company was general, old Zachlebnikoff was in high
spirits, having partaken of an extra glass of wine this evening. So
infectious was the hilarity that even Pavel Pavlovitch took heart of grace
and made a pun. From the end of the table where he sat beside the lady of
the house, there suddenly came a loud laugh from the delighted girls who
had been fortunate enough to hear the virgin attempt.
“Papa, papa, Pavel Pavlovitch has made a joke!” cried several at once: “he
says that there is quite a ‘galaxy of gals’ here!”
“Oho! _he’s_ made a pun too, has he?” cried the old fellow. “Well, what is
it, let’s have it!” He turned to Pavel Pavlovitch with beaming face,
prepared to roar over the latter’s joke.
“Why, I tell you, he says there’s quite a ‘galaxy of gals.’ ”
“Well, go on, where’s the joke?” repeated papa, still dense to the merits
of the pun, but beaming more and more with benevolent desire to see it.
“Oh, papa, how stupid you are not to see it. Why ‘gals’ and ‘galaxy,’
don’t you see?—he says there’s quite a gal-axy of gals!”
“Oh! oh!” guffawed the old gentleman, “Ha-ha! Well, we’ll hope he’ll make
a better one next time, that’s all.”
“Pavel Pavlovitch can’t acquire all the perfections at once,” said Maria
Nikitishna. “Oh, my goodness! he’s swallowed a bone—look!” she added,
jumping up from her chair.
The alarm was general, and Maria’s delight was great.
Poor Pavel Pavlovitch had only choked over a glass of wine, which he
seized and drank to hide his confusion; but Maria declared that it was a
fishbone—that she had seen it herself, and that people had been known to
die of swallowing a bone just like that.
“Clap him on the back!” cried somebody.
It appeared that there were numerous kind friends ready to perform this
friendly office, and poor Pavel protested in vain that it was nothing but
a common choke. The belabouring went on until the coughing fit was over,
and it became evident that mischievous Maria was at the bottom of it all.
After dinner old Mr. Zachlebnikoff retired for his post-prandial nap,
bidding the young people enjoy themselves in the garden as best they
might.
“You enjoy yourself, too!” he added to Pavel Pavlovitch, tapping the
latter’s shoulder affably as he went by.
When the party were all collected in the garden once more, Pavel suddenly
approached Velchaninoff: “One moment,” he whispered, pulling the latter by
the coat-sleeve.
The two men went aside into a lonely by-path.
“None of that _here_, please; I won’t allow it here!” said Pavel
Pavlovitch in a choking whisper.
“None of what? Who?” asked Velchaninoff, staring with all his eyes.
Pavel Pavlovitch said nothing more, but gazed furiously at his companion,
his lips trembling in a desperate attempt at a pretended smile. At this
moment the voices of several of the girls broke in upon them, calling them
to some game. Velchaninoff shrugged his shoulders and re-joined the party.
Pavel followed him.
“I’m sure Pavel Pavlovitch was borrowing a handkerchief from you, wasn’t
he? He forgot his handkerchief last time too. Pavel Pavlovitch has
forgotten his handkerchief again, and he has a cold as usual!” cried
Maria.
“Oh, Pavel Pavlovitch, why didn’t you say so?” cried Mrs. Zachlebnikoff,
making towards the house; “you shall have one at once.”
In vain poor Pavel protested that he had two of those necessary articles,
and was _not_ suffering from a cold. Mrs. Zachlebnikoff was glad of the
excuse for retiring to the house, and heard nothing. A few moments
afterwards a maid pursued Pavel with a handkerchief, to the confusion of
the latter gentleman.
A game of “proverbs” was now proposed. All sat down, and the young man
with spectacles was made to retire to a considerable distance and wait
there with his nose close up against the wall and his back turned until
the proverb should have been chosen and the words arranged. Velchaninoff
was the next in turn to be the questioner.
Then the cry arose for Pavel Pavlovitch, and the latter, who had more or
less recovered his good humour by this time, proceeded to the spot
indicated; and, resolved to do his duty like a man, took his stand with
his nose to the wall, ready to stay there motionless until called. The
red-haired young lady was detailed to watch him, in case of fraud on his
part.
No sooner, however, had the wretched Pavel taken up his position at the
wall, than the whole party took to their heels and ran away as fast as
their legs could carry them.
“Run quick!” whispered the girls to Velchaninoff, in despair, for he had
not started with them.
“Why, what’s happened? What’s the matter?” asked the latter, keeping up as
best he could.
“Don’t make a noise! we want to get away and let him go on standing
there—that’s all.”
Katia, it appeared, did not like this practical joke. When the last
stragglers of the party arrived at the end of the garden, among them
Velchaninoff, the latter found Katia angrily scolding the rest of the
girls.
“Very well,” she was saying, “I won’t tell mother this time; but I shall
go away myself: it’s too bad! What will the poor fellow’s feelings be,
standing all alone there, and finding us fled!”
And off she went. The rest, however, were entirely unsympathizing, and
enjoyed the joke thoroughly. Velchaninoff was entreated to appear entirely
unconscious when Pavel Pavlovitch should appear again, just as though
nothing whatever had happened. It was a full quarter of an hour before
Pavel put in an appearance, two thirds, at least, of that time he must
have stood at the wall. When he reached the party he found everyone busy
over a game of _Goriélki_, laughing and shouting and making themselves
thoroughly happy.
Wild with rage, Pavel Pavlovitch again made straight for Velchaninoff, and
tugged him by the coat-sleeve.
“One moment, sir!”
“Oh, my goodness! he’s always coming in with his ‘one moments’!” said
someone.
“A handkerchief wanted again probably!” shouted someone else after the
pair as they retired.
“Come now, this time it was you! You were the originator of this insult!”
muttered Pavel, his teeth chattering with fury.
Velchaninoff interrupted him, and strongly recommended Pavel to bestir
himself to be merrier.
“You are chaffed because you get angry,” he said; “if you try to be jolly
instead of sulky you’ll be let alone!”
To his surprise these words impressed Pavel deeply; he was quiet at once,
and returned to the party with a guilty air, and immediately began to take
part in the games engaged in once more. He was not further bullied at
present, and within half an hour his good humour seemed quite
re-established.
To Velchaninoff’s astonishment, however, he never seemed to presume to
speak to Nadia, although he kept as close to her, on all occasions, as he
possibly could. He seemed to take his position as quite natural, and was
not put out by her contemptuous air towards him.
Pavel Pavlovitch was teased once more, however, before the evening ended.
A game of “Hide-and-seek” was commenced, and Pavel had hidden in a small
room in the house. Being observed entering there by someone, he was locked
in, and left there raging for an hour. Meanwhile, Velchaninoff learned the
“special reason” for Nadia’s joy at his arrival. Maria conducted him to a
lonely alley, where Nadia was awaiting him alone.
“I have quite convinced myself,” began the latter, when they were left
alone, “that you are not nearly so great a friend of Pavel Pavlovitch as
he gave us to understand. I have also convinced myself that you alone can
perform a certain great service for me. Here is his horrid bracelet” (she
drew the case out of her pocket)—“I wish to ask you to be so kind as to
return it to him; I cannot do so myself, because I am quite determined
never to speak to him again all my life. You can tell him so from me, and
better add that he is not to worry me with any more of his nasty presents.
I’ll let him know something else I have to say through other channels.
Will you do this for me?”
“Oh, for goodness sake, spare me!” cried Velchaninoff, almost wringing his
hands.
“How spare you?” cried poor Nadia. Her artificial tone put on for the
occasion had collapsed at once before this check, and she was nearly
crying. Velchaninoff burst out laughing.
“I don’t mean—I should be delighted, you know—but the thing is, I have my
own accounts to settle with him!”
“I knew you weren’t his friend, and that he was lying. I shall never marry
him—never! You may rely on that! I don’t understand how he could dare—at
all events, you really _must_ give him back this horrid bracelet. What am
I to do if you don’t? I _must_ have it given back to him this very day.
He’ll catch it if he interferes with father about me!”
At this moment the spectacled young gentleman issued from the shrubs at
their elbow.
“You are bound to return the bracelet!” he burst out furiously, upon
Velchaninoff, “if only out of respect to the rights of woman——”
He did not finish the sentence, for Nadia pulled him away from beside
Velchaninoff with all her strength.
“How stupid you are,” she cried; “go away. How dare you listen? I told you
to stand a long way off!” She stamped her foot with rage, and for some
while after the young fellow had slunk away she continued to walk along
with flashing eyes, furious with indignation. “You wouldn’t believe how
stupid he is!” she cried at last. “You laugh, but think of my feelings!”
“That’s not _he_, is it?” laughed Velchaninoff.
“Of course not. How could you imagine such a thing! It’s only his friend,
and how he can choose such friends I can’t understand! They say he is a
‘future motive-power,’ but I don’t see it. Alexey Ivanovitch, for the last
time—I have no one else to ask—will you give the bracelet back or not?”
“Very well, I will. Give it to me!”
“Oh, you dear, good Alexey Ivanovitch, thanks!” she cried, enthusiastic
with delight. “I’ll sing all the evening for that! I sing beautifully, you
know! I was telling you a wicked story before dinner. Oh, I _wish_ you
would come down here again; I’d tell you _all_, then, and lots of other
things besides—for you are a dear, kind, good fellow, like—like Katia!”
And sure enough when they reached home she sat down and sang a couple of
songs in a voice which, though entirely untrained, was of great natural
sweetness and considerable strength.
When the party returned from the garden they had found Pavel Pavlovitch
drinking tea with the old folks on the balcony. He had probably been
talking on serious topics, as he was to take his departure the day after
to-morrow for nine months. He never so much as glanced at Velchaninoff and
the rest when they entered; but he evidently had not complained to the
authorities, and all was quiet as yet. But, when Nadia began to sing, he
came in. Nadia did not answer a single one of his questions, but he did
not seem offended by this, and took his stand behind her chair. Once
there, his whole appearance gave it to be understood that that was his own
place by right, and that he allowed none to dispute it.
“It’s Alexey Ivanovitch’s turn to sing now!” cried the girls, when Nadia’s
song was finished, and all crowded round to hear Velchaninoff, who sat
down to accompany himself. He chose a song of Glinke’s, too much neglected
nowadays; it ran:—
“When from your merry lips
Tenderness flows,” &c.
Velchaninoff seemed to address the words to Nadia exclusively, but the
whole party stood around him. His voice had long since gone the way of all
flesh, but it was clear that he must have had a good one once, and it so
happened that Velchaninoff had heard this particular song many years ago,
from Glinkes’ own lips, when a student at the university, and remembered
the great effect that it had made upon him when he first heard it. The
song was full of the most intense passion of expression, and Velchaninoff
sang it well, with his eyes fixed upon Nadia.
Amid the applause that followed the completion of the performance, Pavel
Pavlovitch came forward, seized Nadia’s hand and drew her away from the
proximity of Velchaninoff; he then returned to the latter at the piano,
and, with every evidence of frantic rage, whispered to him, his lips all
of a tremble,
“One moment with you!”
Velchaninoff, seeing that the man was capable of worse things in his then
frame of mind, took Pavel’s hand and led him out through the balcony into
the garden—quite dark now.
“Do you understand, sir, that you must come away at once—_this very
minute_?” said Pavel Pavlovitch.
“No, sir, I do not!”
“Do you remember,” continued Pavel in his frenzied whisper, “do you
remember that you begged me to tell you _all_, _everything_—down to the
smallest details? Well, the time has come for telling you all—come!”
Velchaninoff considered a moment, glanced once more at Pavel Pavlovitch,
and consented to go.
“Oh! stay and have another cup of tea!” said Mrs. Zachlebnikoff, when this
decision was announced.
“Pavel Pavlovitch, why are you taking Alexey Ivanovitch away?” cried the
girls, with angry looks. As for Nadia, she looked so cross with Pavel,
that the latter felt absolutely uncomfortable; but he did not give in.
“Oh, but I am very much obliged to Pavel Pavlovitch,” said Velchaninoff,
“for reminding me of some most important business which I must attend to
this very evening, and which I might have forgotten,” laughed
Velchaninoff, as he shook hands with his host and made his bow to the
ladies, especially to Katia, as the family thought.
“You must come again soon!” said the host; “we have been so glad to see
you; it was so good of you to come!”
“Yes, _so_ glad!” said the lady of the house.
“Do come again soon!” cried the girls, as Pavel Pavlovitch and
Velchaninoff took their seats in the carriage; “Alexey Ivanovitch, _do_
come back soon!” And with these voices in their ears they drove away.
In spite of Velchaninoff’s apparently happy day, the feeling of annoyance
and suffering at his heart had hardly actually left him for a single
moment. Before he sang the song he had not known what to do with himself,
or suppressed anger and melancholy—perhaps that was the reason why he had
sung with so much feeling and passion.
“To think that I could so have lowered myself as to forget everything!” he
thought—and then despised himself for thinking it; “it is more humiliating
still to cry over what is done,” he continued. “Far better to fly into a
passion with someone instead.”
“Fool!” he muttered—looking askance at Pavel Pavlovitch, who sat beside
him as still as a mouse. Pavel Pavlovitch preserved a most obstinate
silence—probably concentrating and ranging his energies. He occasionally
took his hat off, impatiently, and wiped the perspiration from his
forehead.
Once—and once only—Pavel spoke, to the coachman, he asked whether there
was going to be a thunder-storm.
“Wheugh!” said the man, “I should think so! It’s been a steamy day—just
the day for it!”
By the time town was reached—half-past ten—the whole sky was overcast.
“I am coming to your house,” said Pavel to Velchaninoff, when almost at
the door.
“Quite so; but I warn you, I feel very unwell to-night!”
“All right—I won’t stay too long.”
When the two men passed under the gateway, Pavel Pavlovitch disappeared
into the ’dvornik’s’ room for a minute, to speak to Mavra.
“What did you go in there for?” asked Velchaninoff severely as they
mounted the stairs and reached his own door.
“Oh—nothing—nothing at all,—just to tell them about the coachman.——”
“Very well. Mind, I shall not allow you to drink!”
Pavel Pavlovitch did not answer.
Velchaninoff lit a candle, while Pavel threw himself into a chair;—then
the former came and stood menacingly before him.
“I may have told you I should have _my_ last word to say to-night, as well
as you!” he said with suppressed anger in his voice and manner: “Here it
is. I consider conscientiously that things are square between you and me,
now; and therefore there is no more to be said, understand me, about
_anything_. Since this is so, had you not better go, and let me close the
door after you?”
“Let’s cry ‘quits’ first, Alexey Ivanovitch,” said Pavel Pavlovitch,
gazing into Velchaninoff’s eyes with great sweetness.
“Quits?” cried the latter, in amazement; “you strange man, what are we to
cry quits about? Are you harping upon your promise of a ‘last word’?”
“Yes.”
“Oh, well, we have nothing more to cry quits for. We have been quits long
since,” said Velchaninoff.
“Dear me, do you really think so?” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, in a shrill,
sharp voice, pressing his two hands tightly together, finger to finger, as
he held them up before his breast.
Velchaninoff said nothing. He rose from his seat and began to walk up and
down the room. The word “Liza” resounded through and through his soul like
the voice of a bell.
“Well, what is there that you still consider unsettled between us?” he
asked at last, looking angrily at Pavel, who had never ceased to follow
him with his eyes—always holding his hands before his breast, finger tip
to finger tip.
“Don’t go down there any more,” said Pavel, almost in a whisper, and
rising from his seat with every indication of humble entreaty.
“_What!_ is _that_ all?” cried Velchaninoff, bursting into an angry laugh;
“good heavens, man, you have done nothing but surprise me all day.” He had
begun in a tone of exasperation, but he now abruptly changed both voice
and expression, and continued with an air of deep feeling. “Listen,” he
said, “listen to me. I don’t think I have ever felt so deeply humiliated
as I am feeling now, in consequence of the events of to-day. In the first
place, that I should have condescended to go down with you at all, and in
the second place, all that happened there. It has been such a day of
pettifogging—pitiful pettifogging. I have profaned and lowered myself by
taking a share in it all, and forgetting——Well, it’s done now. But look
here—you fell upon me to-day, unawares—upon a sick man. Oh, you needn’t
excuse yourself; at all events I shall certainly _not_ go there again. I
have not the slightest interest in so doing,” he concluded, with an air of
decision.
“No, really!” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, making no secret of his delight and
exultation.
Velchaninoff glanced contemptuously at him, and recommenced his march up
and down the room.
“You have determined to be happy under any circumstances, I suppose?” he
observed, after a pause. He could not resist making the remark
disdainfully.
“Yes, I have,” said Pavel, quietly.
“It’s no business of mine that he’s a fool and a knave, out of pure
idiocy!” thought Velchaninoff. “I can’t help hating him, though I feel
that he is not even worth hating.”
“I’m a permanent husband,” said Pavel Pavlovitch, with the most
exquisitely servile irony, at his own expense. “I remember you using that
expression, Alexey Ivanovitch, long ago, when you were with us at T——. I
remember many of your original phrases of that time, and when you spoke of
‘permanent husbands,’ the other day, I recollected the expression.”
At this point Mavra entered the room with a bottle of champagne and two
glasses.
“Forgive me, Alexey Ivanovitch,” said Pavel, “you know I can’t get on
without it. Don’t consider it an audacity on my part—think of it as a mere
bit of by-play unworthy your notice.”
“Well,” consented Velchaninoff, with a look of disgust, “but I must remind
you that I don’t feel well, and that—”
“One little moment—I’ll go at once, I really will—I _must_ just drink
_one_ glass, my throat is so——”
He seized the bottle eagerly, and poured himself out a glass, drank it
greedily at a gulp, and sat down. He looked at Velchaninoff almost
tenderly.
“What a nasty looking beast!” muttered the latter to himself.
“It’s all her friends that make her like that,” said Pavel, suddenly, with
animation.
“What? Oh, you refer to the lady. I——”
“And, besides, she is so very young still, you see,” resumed Pavel. “I
shall be her slave—she shall see a little society, and a bit of the world.
She will change, sir, entirely.”
“I mustn’t forget to give him back the bracelet, by-the-bye,” thought
Velchaninoff, frowning, as he felt for the case in his coat pocket.
“You said just now that I am determined to be happy, Alexey Ivanovitch,”
continued Pavel, confidentially, and with almost touching earnestness. “I
_must_ marry, else what will become of me? You see for yourself” (he
pointed to the bottle), “and that’s only a hundredth part of what I demean
myself to nowadays. I cannot get on without marrying again, sir; I _must_
have a new faith. If I can but believe in some one again, sir, I shall
rise—I shall be saved.”
“Why are you telling _me_ all this?” exclaimed Velchaninoff, very nearly
laughing in his face; it seemed so absurdly inconsistent.
“Look here,” he continued, roaring the words out, “let me know now, once
for all, why did you drag me down there? what good was I to do you there?”
“I—I wished to try——,” began Pavel, with some confusion.
“Try what?”
“The effect, sir. You see, Alexey Ivanovitch, I have only been visiting
there a week” (he grew more and more confused), “and yesterday, when I met
you, I thought to myself that I had never seen her yet in society; that
is, in the society of other _men_ besides myself—a stupid idea, I know it
is—I was very anxious to try—you know my wretchedly jealous nature.” He
suddenly raised his head and blushed violently.
“He _can’t_ be telling me the truth!” thought Velchaninoff; he was struck
dumb with surprise.
“Well, go on!” he muttered at last.
“Well, I see it was all her pretty childish nature, sir—that and her
friends together. You must forgive my stupid conduct towards yourself
to-day, Alexey Ivanovitch. I will never do it again—never again, sir, I
assure you!”
“I shall never be there to give you the opportunity,” replied Velchaninoff
with a laugh.
“That’s partly why I say it,” said Pavel.
“Oh, come! I’m not the only man in the world you know!” said the other
irritably.
“I am sorry to hear you say that, Alexey Ivanovitch. My esteem for Nadejda
is such that I——”
“Oh, forgive me, forgive me! I meant nothing, I assure you! Only it
surprises me that you should have expected so much of me—that you trusted
me so completely.”
“I trusted you entirely, sir, solely on account of—all that has passed.”
“So that you still consider me the most honourable of men?” Velchaninoff
paused, the naïve nature of his sudden question surprised even himself.
“I always did think you that, sir!” said Pavel, hanging his head.
“Of course, quite so—I didn’t mean quite that—I wanted to say, in spite of
all prejudices you may have formed, you——”
“Yes, in spite of all prejudices!”
“And when you first came to Petersburg?” asked Velchaninoff, who himself
felt the monstrosity of his own inquisitive questions, but could not
resist putting them.
“I considered you the most honourable of men when I first came to
Petersburg, sir; no less. I always respected you, Alexey Ivanovitch!”
Pavel Pavlovitch raised his eyes and looked at his companion without the
smallest trace of confusion.
Velchaninoff suddenly felt cowed and afraid. He was anxious that nothing
should result—nothing disagreeable—from this conversation, since he
himself was responsible for having initiated it.
“I loved you, Alexey Ivanovitch; all that year at T—— I loved you—you did
not observe it,” continued Pavel Pavlovitch, his voice trembling with
emotion, to the great discomfiture of his companion. “You did not observe
my affection, because I was too lowly a being to deserve any sort of
notice; but it was unnecessary that you should observe my love. Well, sir,
and all these nine years I have thought of you, for I have never known
such a year of life as that year was.” (Pavel’s eyes seemed to have a
special glare in them at this point.) “I remembered many of your sayings
and expressions, sir, and I thought of you always as a man imbued with the
loftiest sentiments, and gifted with knowledge and intellect, sir—of the
highest order—a man of grand ideas. ‘Great ideas do not proceed so
frequently from greatness of intellect, as from elevation of taste and
feeling.’ You yourself said that, sir, once. I dare say you have forgotten
the fact, but you did say it. Therefore I always thought of you, sir, as a
man of taste and feeling; consequently I concluded—consequently I trusted
you, in spite of everything.”
Pavel Pavlovitch’s chin suddenly began to tremble. Velchaninoff was
frightened out of his wits. This unexpected tone must be put an end to at
all hazards.
“Enough, Pavel Pavlovitch!” he said softly, blushing violently and with
some show of irritation. “And why—why (Velchaninoff suddenly began to
shout passionately)—why do you come hanging round the neck of a sick man,
a worried man—a man who is almost out of his wits with fever and annoyance
of all sorts, and drag him into this abyss of lies and mirage and vision
and shame—and unnatural, disproportionate, distorted nonsense! Yes, sir,
that’s the most shameful part of the whole business—the disproportionate
nonsense of what you say! You know it’s all humbug; both of us are mean
wretches—both of us; and if you like I’ll prove to you at once that not
only you don’t love me, but that you loathe and hate me with all your
heart, and that you are a liar, whether you know it or not! You took me
down to see your bride, not—not a bit in the world to try how she would
behave in the society of other men—absurd idea!—You simply saw me,
yesterday, and your vile impulse led you to carry me off there in order
that you might show me the girl, and say, as it were. There, look at that!
She’s to be mine! Try your hand _there_ if you can! It was nothing but
your challenge to me! You may not have known it, but this was so, as I
say; and you felt the impulse which I have described. Such a challenge
could not be made without hatred; consequently you hate me.”
Velchaninoff almost _rushed_ up and down the room as he shouted the above
words; and with every syllable the humiliating consciousness that he was
allowing himself to descend to the level of Pavel Pavlovitch afflicted him
and tormented him more and more!
“I was only anxious to be at peace with you, Alexey Ivanovitch!” said
Pavel sadly, his chin and lips working again.
Velchaninoff flew into a violent rage, as if he had been insulted in the
most unexampled manner.
“I tell you once more, sir,” he cried, “that you have attached yourself to
a sick and irritated man, in order that you may surprise him into saying
something unseemly in his madness! We are, I tell you, man, we are men of
different worlds. Understand me! between us two there is a grave,” he
hissed in his fury, and stopped.
“And how do you know,—sir,” cried Pavel Pavlovitch, his face suddenly
becoming all twisted, and deadly white to look at, as he strode up to
Velchaninoff, “how do you know what that grave means to me, sir, here!”
(He beat his breast with terrible earnestness, droll though he looked.)
“Yes, sir, we both stand on the brink of the grave, but on my side there
is more, sir, than on yours—yes, more, more, more!” he hissed, beating his
breast without pause—“more than on yours—the grave means more to me than
to you!”
But at this moment a loud ring at the bell brought both men to their
senses. Someone was ringing so loud that the bell-wire was in danger of
snapping.
“People don’t ring like that for me, observed Velchaninoff angrily.”
“No more they do for me, sir! I assure you they don’t!” said Pavel
Pavlovitch anxiously. He had become the quiet timid Pavel again in a
moment. Velchaninoff frowned and went to open the door.
“Mr. Velchaninoff, if I am not mistaken?” said a strange voice, apparently
belonging to some young and very self-satisfied person, at the door.
“What is it?”
“I have been informed that Mr. Trusotsky is at this moment in your rooms.
I must see him at once.”
Velchaninoff felt inclined to send this self-satisfied looking young
gentleman flying downstairs again; but he reflected—refrained, stood aside
and let him in.
“Here is Mr. Trusotsky. Come in.”
A young fellow of some nineteen summers entered the room; he might have
been even younger, to judge by his handsome but self-satisfied and very
juvenile face.
He was not badly dressed, at all events his clothes fitted him well; in
stature he was a little above the middle height; he had thick black hair,
and dark, bold eyes—and these were the striking features of his face.
Unfortunately his nose was a little too broad and tip-tilted, otherwise he
would have been a really remarkably good-looking young fellow.—He came in
with some pretension.
“I believe I have the opportunity of speaking to Mr. Trusotsky?” he
observed deliberately, and bringing out the word opportunity with much
apparent satisfaction, as though he wished to accentuate the fact that he
could not possibly be supposed to feel either honour or pleasure in
meeting Mr. Trusotsky. Velchaninoff thought he knew what all this meant;
Pavel Pavlovitch seemed to have an inkling of the state of affairs, too.
His expression was one of anxiety, but he did not show the white feather.
“Not having the honour of your acquaintance,” he said with dignity, “I do
not understand what sort of business you can have with me.”
“Kindly listen to me first, and you can then let me know your ideas on the
subject,” observed the young gentleman, pulling out his tortoiseshell
glasses, and focusing the champagne bottle with them. Having deliberately
inspected that object, he put up his glasses again, and fixing his
attention once more upon Pavel Pavlovitch, remarked:
“Alexander Loboff.”
“What about Alexander Loboff?”
“That’s my name. You’ve not heard of me?”
“No.”
“H’m! Well, I don’t know when you should have, now I think of it; but I’ve
come on important business concerning yourself. I suppose I can sit down?
I’m tired.”
“Oh, pray sit down,” said Velchaninoff, but not before the young man had
taken a chair. In spite of the pain at his heart Velchaninoff could not
help being interested in this impudent youngling.
There seemed to be something in his good-looking, fresh young face that
reminded him of Nadia.
“You can sit down too,” observed Loboff, indicating an empty seat to Pavel
Pavlovitch, with a careless nod of his head.
“Thank you; I shall stand.”
“Very well, but you’ll soon get tired. You need not go away, I think, Mr.
Velchaninoff.”
“I have nowhere to go to, my good sir, I am at home.”
“As you like; I confess I should prefer your being present while I have an
explanation with this gentleman. Nadejda Fedosievna has given you a
flattering enough character, sir, to me.”
“Nonsense; how could she have had time to do so?”
“Immediately after you left. Now, Mr. Trusotsky, this is what I wish to
observe,” he continued to Pavel, the latter still standing in front of
him; “we, that is Nadejda Fedosievna and myself, have long loved one
another, and have plighted our troth. You have suddenly come between us as
an obstruction; I have come to tell you that you had better clear out of
the way at once. Are you prepared to adopt my suggestion?”
Pavel Pavlovitch took a step backward in amazement; his face paled
visibly, but in a moment a spiteful smile curled his lip.
“Not in the slightest degree prepared, sir,” he said, laconically.
“Dear me,” said the young fellow, settling himself comfortably in his
chair, and throwing one leg over the other.
“Indeed, I do not know whom I am speaking to,” added Pavel Pavlovitch, “so
that it can’t hardly be worth your while to continue.”
So saying he sat down at last.
“I _said_ you’d get tired,” remarked the youth. “I informed you just now,”
he added, “that my name is Alexander Loboff, and that Nadejda and I have
plighted our troth; consequently you cannot truthfully say, as you did say
just now, that you don’t know who I am, nor can you honestly assert that
you do not see what we can have to talk about. Not to speak of
myself—there is Nadejda Fedosievna to be considered—the lady to whom you
have so impudently attached yourself: that alone is matter sufficient for
explanation between us.”
All this the young fellow rattled off carelessly enough, as if the thing
were so self-evident that it hardly needed mentioning. While talking, he
raised his eye-glass once more, and inspected some object for an instant,
putting the glass back in his pocket immediately afterwards.
“Excuse me, young man,” began Pavel Pavlovitch: but the words “young man”
were fatal.
“At any other moment,” observed the youth, “I should of course forbid your
calling me ‘young man’ at once; but you must admit that in this case my
youth is my principal advantage over yourself, and that even this very day
you would have given anything—nay, at the moment when you presented your
bracelet—to be just a little bit younger.”
“Cheeky young brat!” muttered Velchaninoff.
“In any case,” began Pavel Pavlovitch, with dignity, “I do not consider
your reasons as set forth—most questionable and improper reasons at the
best—sufficient to justify the continuance of this conversation. I see
your ’business’ is mere childishness and nonsense: to-morrow I shall have
the pleasure of an explanation with Mr. Zachlebnikoff, my respected
friend. Meanwhile, sir, perhaps you will make it convenient to—depart.”
“That’s the sort of man he is,” cried the youth, hotly, turning to
Velchaninoff: “he is not content with being as good as kicked out of the
place, and having faces made at him, but he must go down again to-morrow
to carry tales about us to Mr. Zachlebnikoff. Do you not prove by this,
you obstinate man, that you wish to carry off the young lady by force?
that you desire to _buy_ her of people who preserve—thanks to the relics
of barbarism still triumphant among us—a species of power over her? Surely
she showed you sufficiently clearly that she _despises_ you? You have had
your wretched tasteless present of to-day—that bracelet thing—returned to
you; what more do you want?”
“Excuse me, no bracelet has been, or can be returned to me,” said Pavel
Pavlovitch, with a shudder of anxiety, however.
“How so? hasn’t Mr. Velchaninoff given it to you?”
“Oh, the deuce take you, sir,” thought Velchaninoff. “Nadejda Fedosievna
certainly did give me this case for you, Pavel Pavlovitch,” he said; “I
did not wish to take it, but she was anxious that I should: here it is,
I’m very sorry.”
He took out the case and laid it down on the table before the enraged
Pavel Pavlovitch.
“How is it you have not handed it to him before?” asked the young man
severely.
“I had no time, as you may conclude,” said Velchaninoff with a frown.
“H’m! Strange circumstance!”
“_What_, sir?”
“Well, you must admit it _is_ strange! However, I am quite prepared to
believe that there has been some mistake.”
Velchaninoff would have given worlds to get up and drub the impertinent
young rascal and drag him out of the house by the ear; but he could not
contain himself, and burst out laughing. The boy immediately followed suit
and laughed too.
But for Pavel Pavlovitch it was no laughing matter.
If Velchaninoff had seen the ferocious look which the former cast at him
at the moment when he and Loboff laughed, he would have realized that
Pavel Pavlovitch was in the act of passing a fatal limit of forbearance.
He did not see the look; but it struck him that it was only fair to stand
up for Pavel now.
“Listen, Mr. Loboff,” he said, in friendly tones, “not to enter into the
consideration of other matters, I may point out that Mr. Trusotsky brings
with him, in his wooing of Miss Zachlebnikoff, a name and circumstances
fully well-known to that esteemed family; in the second place, he brings a
fairly respectable position in the world; and thirdly, he brings wealth.
Therefore he may well be surprised to find himself confronted by such a
rival as yourself—a gentleman of great wealth, doubtless, but at the same
time so very young, that he could not possibly look upon you as a serious
rival; therefore, again, he is quite right in begging you to bring the
conversation to an end.”
“What do you mean by ‘so very young’? I was nineteen a month since; by the
law I might have been married long ago. That’s a sufficient answer to your
argument.”
“But what father would consent to allowing his daughter to marry you
_now_—even though you may be a Rothschild to come, or a benefactor to
humanity in the future. A man of nineteen years old is not capable of
answering for himself and yet you are ready to take on your own
responsibility another being—in other words, a being who is as much a
child as you are yourself. Why, it is hardly even honourable on your part,
is it? I have presumed to address you thus, because you yourself referred
the matter to me as a sort of arbiter between yourself and Pavel
Pavlovitch.”
“Yes, by-the-bye, ‘Pavel Pavlovitch,’ I forgot he was called that,”
remarked the youth. “I wonder why I thought of him all along as ‘Vassili
Petrovitch.’ Look here, sir (addressing Velchaninoff), you have not
surprised me in the least. I knew you were all tarred with one brush. It
is strange that you should have been described to me as a man of some
originality. However, to business. All that you have said is, of course,
utter nonsense; not only is there nothing ‘dishonourable’ about my
intentions, as you permitted yourself to suggest, but the fact of the
matter is entirely the reverse, as I hope to prove to you by-and-bye. In
the first place, we have promised each other marriage, besides which I
have given her my word that if she ever repents of her promise she shall
have her full liberty to throw me over. I have given her surety to that
effect before witnesses.”
“I bet anything your friend—what’s his name?—Predposiloff invented that
idea,” cried Velchaninoff.
“He-he-he!” giggled Pavel Pavlovitch contemptuously.
“What is that person giggling about? You are right, sir, it was
Predposiloff’s idea. But I don’t think you and I quite understand one
another, do we? and I had such a good report of you. How old are you? Are
you fifty yet?”
“Stick to business, if you please.”
“Forgive the liberty. I did not mean anything offensive. Well, to proceed.
I am no millionaire, and I am no great benefactor to humanity (to reply to
your arguments), but I shall manage to keep myself and my wife. Of course
I have nothing now; I was brought up, in fact, in their house from my
childhood.”
“How so?”
“Oh, because I am a distant relative of this Mr. Zachlebnikoff’s wife.
When my people died, he took me in and sent me to school. The old fellow
is really quite a kind-hearted man, if you only knew it.”
“I do know it!”
“Yes, he’s an old fogey rather, but a kind-hearted old fellow; but I left
him four months ago and began to keep myself. I first joined a railway
office at ten roubles a month, and am now in a notary’s place at
twenty-five. I made him a formal proposal for her a fortnight since. He
first laughed like mad, and afterwards fell into a violent rage, and Nadia
was locked up. She bore it heroically. He had been furious with me before
for throwing up a post in his department which he procured for me. You see
he is a good and kind old fellow at home, but get him in his office
and—oh, my word!—he’s a sort of _Jupiter Tonans_! I told him straight out
that I didn’t like his ways; but the great row was—thanks to the second
chief at the office; he said I insulted him, but I only told him he was an
ignorant beggar. So I threw them all up, and went in for the notary
business. Listen to that! What a clap! We shall have a thunder-storm
directly! What a good thing I arrived before the rain! I came here on
foot, you know, all the way, nearly at a run, too!”
“How in the world did you find an opportunity of speaking to Miss Nadia
then? especially since you are not allowed to meet.”
“Oh, one can always get over the railing; then there’s that red-haired
girl, she helps, and Maria Nikitishna—oh, but she’s a snake, that girl!
What’s the matter? Are you afraid of the thunder-storm?”
“No, I’m ill—seriously ill!”
Velchaninoff had risen from his seat with a fearful sudden pain in his
chest, and was trying to walk up and down the room.
“Oh, really! then I’m disturbing you. I shall go at once,” said the youth,
jumping up.
“No, you don’t disturb me!” said Velchaninoff ceremoniously.
“How not; of course I do, if you’ve got the stomach ache! Well now,
Vassili—what’s your name—Pavel Pavlovitch, let’s conclude this matter. I
will formulate my question for once into words which will adapt themselves
to your understanding: Are you prepared to renounce your claim to the hand
of Nadejda Fedosievna before her parents, and in my presence, with all due
formality?”
“No, sir; not in the slightest degree prepared,” said Pavel Pavlovitch
witheringly; “and allow me to say once more that all this is childish and
absurd, and that you had better clear out!”
“Take care,” said the youth, holding up a warning forefinger; “better give
it up now, for I warn you that otherwise you will spend a lot of money
down there, and take a lot of trouble; and when you come back in nine
months you will be turned out of the house by Nadejda Fedosievna herself;
and if you don’t go _then_, it will be the worse for you. Excuse me for
saying so, but at present you are like the dog in the manger. Think over
it, and be sensible for once in your life.”
“Spare me the moral, if you please,” began Pavel Pavlovitch furiously;
“and as for your low threats I shall take my measures to-morrow—_serious_
measures.”
“Low threats? pooh! You are low yourself to take them as such. Very well,
I’ll wait till to-morrow then; but if you—there’s the thunder again!—_au
revoir_—very glad to have met you, sir.” He nodded to Velchaninoff and
made off hurriedly, evidently anxious to reach home before the rain.
“You see, you see!” cried Pavel to Velchaninoff, the instant that the
young fellow’s back was turned.
“Yes; you are not going to succeed there,” said Velchaninoff. He would not
have been so abrupt and careless of Pavel’s feelings if it had not been
for the dreadful pain in his chest.
Pavel Pavlovitch shuddered as though from a sudden scald. “Well, sir, and
you—you were loth to give me back the bracelet, eh?”
“I hadn’t time.”
“Oh! you were sorry—you pitied me, as true friend pities friend!”
“Oh, well, I pitied you, then!” Velchaninoff was growing angrier every
moment. However, he informed Pavel Pavlovitch shortly as to how he had
received the bracelet, and how Nadia had almost forced it upon him.
“You must understand,” he added, “that otherwise I should never have
agreed to accept the commission; there are quite enough disagreeables
already.”
“You liked the job, and accepted it with pleasure,” giggled Pavel
Pavlovitch.
“That is foolish on your part; but I suppose you must be forgiven. You
must have seen from that boy’s behaviour that I play no part in this
matter. Others are the principal actors, not I!”
“At all events the job had attractions for you.” Pavel Pavlovitch sat down
and poured out a glass of wine.
“You think I shall knuckle under to that young gentleman? Pooh! I shall
drive him out to-morrow, sir, like dust. I’ll smoke this little gentleman
out of his nursery, sir; you see if I don’t.” He drank his wine off at a
gulp, and poured out some more. He seemed to grow freer as the moments
went by; he talked glibly now.
“Ha-ha! Sachinka and Nadienka!(2) darling little children. Ha-ha-ha!” He
was beside himself with fury.
At this moment, a terrific crash of thunder startled the silence, and was
followed by flashes of lightning and sheets of heavy rain. Pavel
Pavlovitch rose and shut the window.
“The fellow asked you if you were afraid of the thunder; do you remember?
Ha-ha-ha! Velchaninoff afraid of thunder! And all that about ‘fifty years
old’ wasn’t bad, eh? Ha-ha-ha!” Pavel Pavlovitch was in a spiteful mood.
“You seem to have settled yourself here,” said Velchaninoff, who could
hardly speak for agony. “Do as you like, I must lie down.”
“Come, you wouldn’t turn a _dog_ out to-night!” replied Pavel, glad of a
grievance.
“Of course, sit down; drink your wine—do anything you like,” murmured
Velchaninoff, as he laid himself flat on his divan, and groaned with pain.
“Am I to spend the night? Aren’t you afraid?”
“What of?” asked Velchaninoff, raising his head slightly.
“Oh, nothing. Only last time you seemed to be a little alarmed, that’s
all.”
“You are a fool!” said the other angrily, as he turned his face to the
wall.
“Very well, sir; all right,” said Pavel.
Velchaninoff fell asleep within a minute or so of lying down. The
unnatural strain of the day, and his sickly state of health together, had
suddenly undermined his strength, and he was as weak as a child. But
physical pain would have its own, and soon conquered weakness and sleep;
in an hour he was wide awake again, and rose from the divan in anguish.
Pavel Pavlovitch was asleep on the other sofa. He was dressed, and in his
boots; his hat lay on the floor, and his eye-glass hung by its cord almost
to the ground. Velchaninoff did not wake his guest. The room was full of
tobacco smoke, and the bottle was empty; he looked savagely at the
sleeping drunkard.
Having twisted himself painfully off his bed, Velchaninoff began to walk
about, groaning and thinking of his agony; he could lie no longer.
He was alarmed for this pain in his chest, and not without reason. He was
subject to these attacks, and had been so for many years; but they came
seldom, luckily—once a year or two years. On such occasions, his agony was
so dreadful for some ten hours or so that he invariably believed that he
must be actually dying.
This night, his anguish was terrible; it was too late to send for the
doctor, but it was far from morning yet. He staggered up and down the
room, and before long his groans became loud and frequent.
The noise awoke Pavel Pavlovitch. He sat up on his divan, and for some
time gazed in terror and perplexity upon Velchaninoff, as the latter
walked moaning up and down. At last he gathered his senses, and enquired
anxiously what was the matter.
Velchaninoff muttered something unintelligible.
“It’s your kidneys—I’m sure it is,” cried Pavel, very wide awake of a
sudden. “I remember Peter Kuzmich used to have the same sort of attacks.
The kidneys—why, one can die of it. Let me go and fetch Mavra.”
“No, no; I don’t want anything,” muttered Velchaninoff, waving him off
irritably.
But Pavel Pavlovitch—goodness knows why—was beside himself with anxiety;
he was as much exercised as though the matter at issue were the saving of
his own son’s life. He insisted on immediate compresses, and told
Velchaninoff he must drink two or three cups of very hot weak tea—boiling
hot. He ran for Mavra, lighted the fire in the kitchen, put the kettle on,
put the sick man back to bed, covered him up, and within twenty minutes
had the first hot application all ready, as well as the tea.
“Hot plates, sir, hot plates,” he cried, as he clapped the first, wrapped
in a napkin, on to Velchaninoff’s chest. “I have nothing else handy; but I
give you my word it’s as good as anything else. Drink this tea quick,
never mind if you scald your tongue—life is dearer. You can die of this
sort of thing, you know.” He sent sleepy Mavra out of her wits with
flurry; the plates were changed every couple of minutes. At the third
application, and after having taken two cups of scalding tea, Velchaninoff
suddenly felt decidedly better.
“Capital! thank God! if we can once get the better of the pain it’s a good
sign!” cried Pavel, delightedly, and away he ran for another plate and
some more tea.
“If only we can beat the pain down!” he kept muttering to himself every
minute.
In half an hour the agony was passed, but the sick man was so completely
knocked up that, in spite of Pavel’s repeated entreaties to be allowed to
apply “just one more plate,” he could bear no more. His eyes were drooping
from weakness.
“Sleep—sleep,” he muttered faintly.
“Very well,” consented Pavel, “go to sleep.”
“Are you spending the night here? What time is it?”
“Nearly two.”
“You must sleep here.”
“Yes, yes—all right. I will.”
A moment after the sick man called to Pavel again.
“You—you—” muttered the former faintly, as Pavel ran up and bent over him,
“you are better than I am. I understand all—all—thank you!”
“Go to sleep!” whispered Pavel Pavlovitch, as he crept back to his divan
on tip-toes.
Velchaninoff, dozing off, heard Pavel quietly make his bed, undress and
lie down, all very softly, and then put the light out.
Undoubtedly Velchaninoff fell asleep very quietly when the light was once
out; he remembered that much afterwards. Yet all the while he was asleep,
and until he awoke, he dreamed that he could not go to sleep in spite of
his weakness. At length he dreamed that he was delirious, and that he
could not for the life of him chase away the visions which crowded in upon
him, although he was conscious the whole while they _were_ but visions and
not reality. The apparition was familiar to him. He thought that his front
door was open, and that his room gradually filled with people pouring in.
At the table in the middle of the room, sat one man exactly as had been
the case a month before, during one of his dreams. As on the previous
occasion, this man leant on his elbow at the table and would not speak; he
was in a round hat with a crape band.
“How?” thought the dreamer. “Was it really Pavel Pavlovitch last time as
well?” However, when he looked at the man’s face, he was convinced that it
was quite another person.
“Why has he a crape band, then?” thought Velchaninoff in perplexity.
The noise and chattering of all these people was dreadful; they seemed
even more exasperated with Velchaninoff than on the former occasion. They
were all threatening him with something or other, shaking their fists at
him, and shouting something which he could not understand.
“It’s all a vision,” he dreamed, “I know quite well that I am up and
about, because I could not lie still for anguish!”
Yet the cries and noise at times seemed so real that he was now and again
half-convinced of their reality.
“Surely this _can’t_ be delirium!” he thought. “What on earth do all these
people want of me—my God!”
Yet if it were not a vision, surely all these cries would have roused
Pavel Pavlovitch? There he was, fast asleep in his divan!
Then something suddenly occurred as in the old dream. Another crowd of
people surged in, crushing those who were already collected inside. These
new arrivals carried something large and heavy; he could judge of the
weight by their footsteps labouring upstairs.
Those in the room cried, “They’re bringing it! they’re bringing it!”
Every eye flashed as it turned and glared at Velchaninoff; every hand
threatened him and then pointed to the stairs.
Undoubtedly it was reality, not delirium. Velchaninoff thought that he
stood up and raised himself on tip-toes, in order to see over the heads of
the crowd. He wanted to know what was being carried in.
His heart beat wildly, wildly, wildly; and suddenly, as in his former
dream, there came one—two—three loud rings at the bell.
And again, the sound of the bell was so distinct and clear that he felt it
_could_ not be a dream. He gave a cry, and awoke; but he did not rush to
the door as on the former occasion.
What sudden idea was it that guided his movements? Had he any idea at all,
or was it impulse that prompted him what to do? He sprang up in bed, with
arms outstretched, as though to ward off an attack, straight towards the
divan where Pavel Pavlovitch was sleeping.
His hands encountered other hands outstretched in his direction;
consequently some one must have been standing over him.
The curtains were drawn, but it was not absolutely dark, because a faint
light came from the next room, which had no curtains.
Suddenly something cut the palm of his left hand, some of his fingers
causing him sharp pain. He instantly realized that he had seized a knife
or a razor, and he closed his hand upon it with the rapidity of thought.
At that moment something fell to the ground with a hard metallic sound.
Velchaninoff was probably three times as strong as Pavel Pavlovitch, but
the struggle lasted for a long while—at least three minutes.
The former, however, forced his adversary to the earth, and bent his arms
back behind his head; then he paused, for he was most anxious to tie the
hands. Holding the assassin’s wrist with his wounded left hand, he felt
for the blind cord with his right. For a long while he could not find it;
at last he grasped it, and tore it down.
He was amazed afterwards at the unnatural strength which he must have
displayed during all this.
During the whole of the struggle neither man spoke a word; only their
heavy breathing was audible, and the inarticulate sounds emitted by both
as they fought.
At length, having secured his opponent’s hands, Velchaninoff left him on
the ground, rose, drew the curtains, and pulled up the blind.
The deserted street was light now. He opened the window, and stood
breathing in the fresh air for a few moments. It was a little past four
o’clock. He shut the window once more, fetched a towel and bound up his
cut hand as tightly as he could to stop the flow of blood.
At his feet he caught sight of the opened razor lying on the carpet; he
picked it up, wiped it, and put it by in its own case, which he now saw he
had left upon the little cupboard beside the divan which Pavel Pavlovitch
occupied. He locked the cupboard.
Having completed all these arrangements, he approached Pavel Pavlovitch
and looked at him. Meanwhile the latter had managed to raise himself from
the floor and reach a chair; he was now sitting in it—undressed to his
shirt, which was stained with marks of blood both back and
front—Velchaninoff’s blood, not his own.
Of course this was Pavel Pavlovitch; but it would have been only natural
for any one who had known him before, and saw him at this moment, to doubt
his identity. He sat upright in his chair—very stiffly, owing to the
uncomfortable position of his tightly bound hands behind his back; his
face looked yellow and crooked, and he shuddered every other moment. He
gazed intently, but with an expression of dazed perplexity, at
Velchaninoff.
Suddenly he smiled gravely, and nodding towards a carafe of water on the
table, muttered, “A little drop!” Velchaninoff poured some into a glass,
and held it for him to drink.
Pavel gulped a couple of mouthfuls greedily—then suddenly raised his head
and gazed intently at Velchaninoff standing over him; he said nothing,
however, but finished the water. He then sighed deeply.
Velchaninoff took his pillows and some of his clothing, and went into the
next room, locking Pavel Pavlovitch behind him.
His pain had quite disappeared, but he felt very weak after the strain of
his late exertion. Goodness knows whence came his strength for the trial;
he tried to think, but he could not collect his ideas, the shock had been
too great.
His eyes would droop now and again, sometimes for ten minutes at a time;
then he would shudder, wake up, remember all that had passed and raise the
blood-stained rag bound about his hand to prove the reality of his
thoughts; then he would relapse into eager, feverish thought. One thing
was quite certain, Pavel Pavlovitch had intended to cut his throat,
though, perhaps, a quarter of an hour before the fatal moment he had not
known that he would make the attempt. Perhaps he had seen the razor case
last evening, and thought nothing of it, only remembering the fact that it
was there. The razors were usually locked up, and only yesterday
Velchaninoff had taken one out in order to make himself neat for his visit
to the country, and had omitted to lock it up again.
“If he had premeditated murdering me, he would certainly have provided
himself with a knife or a pistol long ago; he could not have relied on my
razors, which he never saw until yesterday,” concluded Velchaninoff.
At last the clock struck six. Velchaninoff arose, dressed himself, and
went into Pavel Pavlovitch’s room. As he opened the door he wondered why
he had ever locked it, and why he had not allowed Pavel to go away at
once.
To his surprise the prisoner was dressed, he had doubtless found means to
get his hands loose. He was sitting in an arm-chair, but rose when
Velchaninoff entered. His hat was in his hand.
His anxious look seemed to say as plain as words:—
“Don’t talk to me! It’s no use talking—don’t talk to me!”
“Go!” said Velchaninoff. “Take your jewel-case!” he added.
Pavel Pavlovitch turned back and seized his bracelet-case, stuffing it
into his pocket, and went out.
Velchaninoff stood in the hall, waiting to shut the front door after him.
Their looks met for the last time. Pavel Pavlovitch stopped, and the two
men gazed into each others eyes for five seconds or so, as though in
indecision. At length Velchaninoff faintly waved him away with his hand.
“Go!” he said, only half aloud, as he closed the door and turned the key.
A feeling of immense happiness took possession of Velchaninoff; something
was finished, and done with, and settled. Some huge anxiety was at an end,
so it seemed to him. This anxiety had lasted five weeks.
He raised his hand and looked at the blood-stained rag bound about it.
“Oh, yes!” he thought, “it is, indeed, all over now.”
And all this morning—the first time for many a day, he did not even once
think of Liza; just as if the blood from those cut fingers had wiped out
that grief as well, and made him “quits” with it.
He quite realized how terrible was the danger which he had passed through.
“For those people,” he thought, “who do not know a minute or two
before-hand that they are going to murder you, when they once get the
knife into their hands, and feel the first touch of warm blood—Good
Heaven! they not only cut your throat, they hack your head off
afterwards—right off!”
Velchaninoff could not sit at home, he _must_ go out and let something
happen to him, and he walked about in hopes of something turning up; he
longed to _talk_, and it struck him that he might fairly go to the doctor
and talk to him, and have his hand properly bound up.
The doctor inquired how he hurt his hand, which made Velchaninoff laugh
like mad; he was on the point of telling all, but refrained. Several times
during the day he was on the point of telling others the whole story. Once
it was to a perfect stranger in a restaurant, with whom he had begun to
converse on his own initiative. Before this day he had hated the very idea
of speaking to strangers in the public restaurants.
He went into a shop and ordered some new clothes, not with the idea of
visiting the Pogoryeltseffs however—the thought of any such visit was
distasteful to him; besides he could not leave town, he felt that he must
stay and see what was going to happen.
Velchaninoff dined and enjoyed his dinner, talking affably to his
neighbour and to the waiter as well. When evening fell he went home, his
head was whirling a little, and he felt slightly delirious; the first
sight of his rooms gave him quite a start. He walked round them and
reflected. He visited the kitchen, which he had hardly ever done before in
his life, and thought, “This is where they heated the plates last night.”
He locked the doors carefully, and lit his candles earlier than usual. As
he shut the door he remembered that he had asked Mavra, as he passed the
dvornik’s lodging, whether Pavel Pavlovitch had been. Just as if the
latter could possibly have been near the place!
Having then carefully locked himself in, he opened the little cupboard
where his razors were kept, and took out “the” razor. There was still some
of the blood on the bone handle. He put the razor back again, and locked
the cupboard.
He was sleepy; he felt that he must go to sleep as speedily as possible,
otherwise he would be useless “for to-morrow,” and to-morrow seemed to him
for some reason or other to be about to be a fateful day for him.
But all those thoughts which had crowded in upon him all day, and had
never left him for a moment, were still in full swing within his brain; he
thought, and thought, and thought, and could not fall asleep.
If Pavel Pavlovitch arrived at murdering point accidentally, had he ever
seriously thought of murder even for a single evil instant before?
Velchaninoff decided the question strangely enough: Pavel Pavlovitch _had_
the desire to murder him, but did not himself know of the existence of
this desire.
“It seems an absurd conclusion; but so it is!” thought Velchaninoff.
Pavel Pavlovitch did not come to Petersburg to look out for a new
appointment, nor did he come for the sake of finding Bagantoff, in spite
of his rage when the latter died. No! he despised Bagantoff thoroughly.
Pavel Pavlovitch had come to St. Petersburg for _him_, and had brought
Liza with him, for him alone, Velchaninoff.
“Did _I_ expect to have my throat cut?” Velchaninoff decided that he _had_
expected it, from the moment when he saw Pavel Pavlovitch in the carriage
following in Bagantoff’s funeral procession. “That is I expected
something—of course, not exactly to have my throat cut! And surely—surely,
it was not all _bonâ fide_ yesterday,” he reflected, raising his head from
the pillow in the excitement of the idea. “_Surely_ it cannot have been
all in good faith that that fellow assured me of his love for me, beating
his breast, and with his under lip trembling, as he spoke!
“Yes, it was absolutely _bonâ fide_!” he decided. “This quasimodo of T——
was quite good enough and generous enough to fall in love with his wife’s
lover—his wife in whom he never observed ’anything’ during the twenty
years of their married life.
“He respected and loved me for nine years, and remembered both me and my
sayings. My goodness, to think of that! and I knew nothing whatever of all
this! Oh, no! he was not lying yesterday! But did he love me _while_ he
declared his love for me, and said that we must be ‘quits!’ Yes, he did,
he loved me spitefully—and spiteful love is sometimes the strongest of
all.
“I daresay I made a colossal impression upon him down at T——, for it is
just upon such Schiller-like men that one is liable to make a colossal
impression. He exaggerated my value a thousand fold; perhaps it was my
‘philosophical retirement’ that struck him! It would be curious to
discover precisely what it was that made so great an impression upon him.
Who knows, it may have been that I wore a good pair of gloves, and knew
how to put them on. These quasimodo fellows love æstheticism to
distraction! Give them a start in the direction of admiration for
yourself, and they will do all the rest, and give you a thousand times
more than your due of every virtue that exists; will fight to the death
for you with pleasure, if you ask it of them. How high he must have held
my aptitude for illusionizing others; perhaps that has struck him as much
as anything else! for he remarked: ‘If _this_ man deceived me, whom am I
ever to trust again!’
“After such a cry as that a man may well turn wild beast.
“And he came here to ’embrace and weep over me,’ as he expressed it. H’m!
that means he came to cut my throat, and _thought_ that he came to embrace
and weep over me. He brought Liza with him, too.
“What if I _had_ wept with him and embraced him? Perhaps he really would
have fully and entirely forgiven me—for he was yearning to forgive me, I
could see that! And all this turned to drunkenness and bestiality at the
first check. Yes, Pavel Pavlovitch, the most deformed of all deformities
is the abortion with noble feelings. And this man was foolish enough to
take me down to see his ‘bride.’ My goodness! his bride! Only such a
lunatic of a fellow could ever have developed so wild an idea as a ‘new
existence’ to be inaugurated by an alliance between himself and Nadia. But
you are not to blame, Pavel Pavlovitch, you are a deformity, and all your
ideas and actions and aspirations must of necessity be deformed. But
deformity though he be, why in the world was _my_ sanction, _my_ blessing,
as it were, necessary to his union with Miss Zachlebnikoff? Perhaps he
sincerely hoped that there, with so much sweet innocence and charm around
us, we should fall into each other’s arms in some leafy spot, and weep out
our differences on each other’s shoulders?
“Was _murder_ in his thoughts when I caught him standing between our beds
that first time, in the darkness? No. I think not. And yet the first idea
of it may have entered his soul as he stood there—And if I had not left
the razors out, probably nothing would have happened. Surely that is so;
for he avoided me for weeks—he was _sorry_ for me, and avoided me. He
chose Bagantoff to expend his wrath upon, first, not me! He jumped out of
bed and fussed over the hot plates, to divert his mind from murder
perhaps—from the knife to charity! Perhaps he tried to save both himself
and me by his hot plates!”
So mused Velchaninoff, his poor overwrought brain working on and on, and
jumping from conclusion to conclusion with the endless activity of fever,
until he fell asleep. Next morning he awoke with no less tired brain and
body, but with a new terror, an unexpected and novel feeling of dread
hanging over him.
This dread consisted in the fact that he felt that he, Velchaninoff, must
go and see Pavel Pavlovitch that very day; he knew not why he must go, but
he felt drawn to go, as though by some unseen force. The idea was too
loathsome to look into, so he left it to take care of itself as an
unalterable fact. The madness of it, however, was modified, and the whole
aspect of the thought became more reasonable, after a while, when it took
shape and resolved itself into a conviction in Velchaninoff’s mind that
Pavel Pavlovitch had returned home, locked himself up, and hung himself to
the bedpost, as Maria Sisevna had described of the wretched suicide
witnessed by poor Liza.
“Why should the fool hang himself?” he repeated over and over again; yet
the thought _would_ return that he was bound to hang himself, as Liza had
said that he threatened to do. Velchaninoff could not help adding that if
he were in Pavel Pavlovitch’s place he would probably do the same.
So the end of it was that instead of going out to his dinner, he set off
for Pavel Pavlovitch’s lodging, “just to ask Maria Sisevna after him.” But
before he had reached the street he paused and his face flushed up with
shame. “Surely I am not going there to embrace and weep over him! Surely I
am not going to add this one last pitiful folly to the long list of my
late shameful actions!”
However, his good providence saved him from this “pitiful folly,” for he
had hardly passed through the large gateway into the street, when
Alexander Loboff suddenly collided with him. The young fellow was dashing
along in a state of great excitement.
“I was just coming to you. Our friend Pavel Pavlovitch—a nice sort of
fellow he is——”
“Has he hung himself?” gasped Velchaninoff.
“Hung himself? Who? Why?” asked Loboff, with his eyes starting out of his
head.
“Oh! go on, I meant nothing!”
“Tfu! What a funny line your thoughts seem to take. He hasn’t hung himself
a bit—why in the world should he?—on the contrary, he’s gone away. I’ve
just seen him off! My goodness, how that fellow can drink! We had three
bottles of wine. Predposiloff was there too—but how the fellow drinks!
Good heavens! he was singing in the carriage when the train went off! He
thought of you, and kissed his hand to you, and sent his love. He’s a
scamp, that fellow, eh?”
Young Loboff had apparently had quite his share of the three bottles, his
face was flushed and his utterance thick. Velchaninoff roared with
laughter.
“So you ended up by weeping over each others shoulders, did you? Ha-ha-ha!
Oh, you poetical, Schiller-ish, funny fellows, you!”
“Don’t scold us. You must know he went down _there_ yesterday and to-day,
and he has withdrawn. He ‘sneaked’ like anything about Nadia and me.
They’ve shut her up. There was such a row, but we wouldn’t give way—and,
my word, how the fellow drinks! He was always talking about you; but, of
course, he is no companion for you. You are, more or less, a respectable
sort of man, and must have belonged to society at some time of your life,
though you seem to have retired into private life just now. Is it poverty,
or what? I couldn’t make head or tail of Pavel Pavlovitch’s story.”
“Oh! Then it was he who gave you those interesting details about me?”
“Yes; don’t be cross about it. It’s better to be a citizen than ‘a swell’
any-day! The thing is one does not know whom to respect in Russia
nowadays! Don’t you think it a diseased feature of the times, in Russia,
that one doesn’t know whom to respect?”
“Quite so, quite so. Well, go on about Pavel Pavlovitch——”
“Well, he sat down in the railway carriage and began singing, then he
cried a bit. It was really disgusting to see the fellow. I hate fools!
Then he began to throw money to beggars ‘for the repose of Liza’s soul,’
he said. Is that his wife?”
“Daughter.”
“What’s the matter with your hand?”
“I cut it.”
“H’m! Never mind, cheer up! It’ll be all right soon! I am glad that fellow
has gone, you know,—confound him! But I bet anything he’ll marry as soon
as he arrives at his place.”
“Well, what of that? You are going to marry, too!”
“I! That’s quite a different affair! What a funny man you are! Why, if
_you_ are fifty, he must be sixty! Well, ta-ta! Glad I met you—can’t come
in—don’t ask me—no time!”
He started off at a run, but turned a minute after and came back.
“What a fool I am!” he cried, “I forgot all about it—he sent you a letter.
Here it is. How was it you didn’t see him off? Ta-ta!”
Velchaninoff returned home and opened the letter, which was sealed and
addressed to himself.
There was not a syllable inside in Pavel Pavlovitch’s own hand writing;
but he drew out another letter, and knew the writing at once. It was an
old, faded, yellow-looking sheet of paper, and the ink was faint and
discoloured; the letter was addressed to Velchaninoff, and written ten
years before—a couple of months after his departure from T——. He had never
received a copy of this one, but another letter, which he well remembered,
had evidently been written and sent instead of it; he could tell that by
the substance of the faded document in his hand. In this present letter
Natalia Vasilievna bade farewell to him for ever (as she had done in the
other communication), and informed him that she expected her confinement
in a few months. She added, for his consolation, that she would find an
opportunity of purveying his child to him in good time, and pointed out
that their friendship was now cemented for ever. She begged him to love
her no longer, because she could no longer return his love, but authorized
him to pay a visit to T—— after a year’s absence, in order to see the
child. Goodness only knows why she had not sent this letter, but had
changed it for another!
Velchaninoff was deadly pale when he read this document; but he imagined
Pavel Pavlovitch finding it in the family box of black wood with
mother-of-pearl ornamentation and silver mounting, and reading it for the
first time!
“I should think he, too, grew as pale as a corpse,” he reflected, catching
sight of his own face in the looking-glass. “Perhaps he read it and then
closed his eyes and hoped and prayed that when he opened them again the
dreadful letter would be nothing but a sheet of white paper once more!
Perhaps the poor fellow tried this desperate expedient two or three times
before he accepted the truth!”
Two years have elapsed since the events recorded in the foregoing
chapters, and we find our friend Velchaninoff, one lovely summer day,
seated in a railway carriage on his way to Odessa; he was making the
journey for the purpose of seeing a great friend, and of being introduced
to a lady whose acquaintance he had long wished to make.
Without entering into any details, we may remark that Velchaninoff was
entirely changed during these last two years. He was no longer the
miserable, fanciful hypochondriac of those dark days. He had returned to
society and to his friends, who gladly forgave him his temporary relapse
into seclusion. Even those whom he had ceased to bow to, when met, were
now among the first to extend the hand of friendship once more, and asked
no questions—just as though he had been abroad on private business, which
was no affair of theirs.
His success in the legal matters of which we have heard, and the fact of
having his sixty thousand roubles safe at his bankers—enough to keep him
all his life—was the elixir which brought him back to health and spirits.
His premature wrinkles departed, his eyes grew brighter, and his
complexion better; he became more active and vigorous—in fact, as he sat
thinking in a comfortable first-class carriage, he looked a very different
man from the Velchaninoff of two years ago.
The next station to be reached was that at which passengers were expected
to dine, forty minutes being allowed for this purpose.
It so happened that Velchaninoff, while seated at the dinner table, was
able to do a service to a lady who was also dining there. This lady was
young and nice looking, though rather too flashily dressed, and was
accompanied by a young officer who unfortunately was scarcely in a
befitting condition for ladies’ society, having refreshed himself at the
bar to an unnecessary extent. This young man succeeded in quarrelling with
another person equally unfit for ladies’ society, and a brawl ensued,
which threatened to land both parties upon the table in close proximity to
the lady. Velchaninoff interfered, and removed the brawlers to a safe
distance, to the great and almost boundless gratitude of the alarmed lady,
who hailed him as her “guardian angel.” Velchaninoff was interested in the
young woman, who looked like a respectable provincial lady—of provincial
manners and taste, as her dress and gestures showed.
A conversation was opened, and the lady immediately commenced to lament
that her husband was “never by when he was wanted,” and that he had now
gone and hidden himself somewhere just because he happened to be required.
“Poor fellow, he’ll catch it for this,” thought Velchaninoff. “If you will
tell me your husband’s name,” he added aloud, “I will find him, with
pleasure.”
“Pavel Pavlovitch,” hiccupped the young officer.
“Your husband’s name is Pavel Pavlovitch, is it?” inquired Velchaninoff
with curiosity, and at the same moment a familiar bald head was interposed
between the lady and himself.
“Here you are _at last_,” cried the wife, hysterically.
It was indeed Pavel Pavlovitch.
He gazed in amazement and dread at Velchaninoff, falling back before him
just as though he saw a ghost. So great was his consternation, that for
some time it was clear that he did not understand a single word of what
his wife was telling him—which was that Velchaninoff had acted as her
guardian angel, and that he (Pavel) ought to be ashamed of himself for
never being at hand when he was wanted.
At last Pavel Pavlovitch shuddered, and woke up to consciousness.
Velchaninoff suddenly burst out laughing. “Why, we are old friends”—he
cried, “friends from childhood!” He clapped his hand familiarly and
encouragingly on Pavel’s shoulder. Pavel smiled wanly. “Hasn’t he ever
spoken to you of Velchaninoff?”
“No, never,” said the wife, a little confused.
“Then introduce me to your wife, you faithless friend!”
“This—this is Mr. Velchaninoff!” muttered Pavel Pavlovitch, looking the
picture of confusion.
All went swimmingly after this. Pavel Pavlovitch was despatched to cater
for the party, while his lady informed Velchaninoff that they were on
their way from O——, where Pavel Pavlovitch served, to their country
place—a lovely house, she said, some twenty-five miles away. There they
hoped to receive a party of friends, and if Mr. Velchaninoff would be so
very kind as to take pity on their rustic home, and honour it with a
visit, she should do her best to show her gratitude to the guardian angel
who, etc., etc. Velchaninoff replied that he would be delighted; and that
he was an idle man, and always free—adding a compliment or two which
caused the fair lady to blush with delight, and to tell Pavel Pavlovitch,
who now returned from his quest, that Alexey Ivanovitch had been so kind
as to promise to pay them a visit next week, and stay a whole month.
Pavel Pavlovitch, to the amazed wrath of his wife, smiled a sickly smile,
and said nothing.
After dinner the party bade farewell to Velchaninoff, and returned to
their carriage, while the latter walked up and down the platform smoking
his cigar; he knew that Pavel Pavlovitch would return to talk to him.
So it turned out. Pavel came up with an expression of the most anxious and
harassed misery. Velchaninoff smiled, took his arm, led him to a seat, and
sat down beside him. He did not say anything, for he was anxious that
Pavel should make the first move.
“So you are coming to us?” murmured the latter at last, plunging _in
medias res_.
“I knew you’d begin like that! you haven’t changed an atom!” cried
Velchaninoff, roaring with laughter, and slapping him confidentially on
the back. “Surely, you don’t really suppose that I ever had the smallest
intention of visiting you—and staying a month too!”
Pavel Pavlovitch gave a start.
“Then you’re _not_ coming?” he cried, without an attempt to hide his joy.
“No, no! of course not!” replied Velchaninoff, laughing. He did not know
why, but all this was exquisitely droll to him; and the further it went
the funnier it seemed.
“Really—are you really serious?” cried Pavel, jumping up.
“Yes; I tell you, I won’t come—not for the world!”
“But what will my wife say now? She thinks you intend to come!”
“Oh, tell her I’ve broken my leg—or anything you like!”
“She won’t believe!” said Pavel, looking anxious.
“Ha-ha-ha! You catch it at home, I see! Tell me, who is that young
officer?”
“Oh, a distant relative of mine—an unfortunate young fellow——”
“Pavel Pavlovitch!” cried a voice from the carriage, “the second bell has
rung!”
Pavel was about to move off—Velchaninoff stopped him.
“Shall I go and tell your wife how you tried to cut my throat?” he said.
“What are you thinking of—God forbid!” cried Pavel, in a terrible fright.
“Well, go along, then!” said the other, loosing his hold of Pavel’s
shoulder.
“Then—then—you won’t come, will you?” said Pavel once more, timidly and
despairingly, and clasping his hands in entreaty.
“No—I won’t—I swear!—run away—you’ll be late!” He put out his hand
mechanically, then recollected himself, and shuddered. Pavel did not take
the proffered hand, he withdrew his own.
The third bell rang.
An instantaneous but total change seemed to have come over both. Something
snapped within Velchaninoff’s heart—so it seemed to him, and he who had
been roaring with laughter a moment before, seized Pavel Pavlovitch
angrily by the shoulder.
“If I—_I_ offer you my hand, sir” (he showed the scar on the palm of his
left hand)—“if _I_ can offer you my hand, sir, I should think _you_ might
accept it!” he hissed with white and trembling lips.
Pavel Pavlovitch grew deadly white also, his lips quivered and a
convulsion seemed to run through his features:
“And—Liza?” he whispered quickly. Suddenly his whole face worked, and
tears started to his eyes.
Velchaninoff stood like a log before him.
“Pavel Pavlovitch! Pavel Pavlovitch!” shrieked the voice from the
carriage, in despairing accents, as though some one were being murdered.
Pavel roused himself and started to run. At that moment the engine
whistled, and the train moved off. Pavel Pavlovitch just managed to cling
on, and so climb into his carriage, as it moved out of the station.
Velchaninoff waited for another train, and then continued his journey to
Odessa.
