On the thirteenth of January of this present year, 1865, at half-past
twelve in the day, Elena Ivanovna, the wife of my cultured friend Ivan
Matveitch, who is a colleague in the same department, and may be said to be
a distant relation of mine, too, expressed the desire to see the crocodile
now on view at a fixed charge in the Arcade. As Ivan Matveitch had already
in his pocket his ticket for a tour abroad (not so much for the sake of his
health as for the improvement of his mind), and was consequently free from
his official duties and had nothing whatever to do that morning, he offered
no objection to his wife's irresistible fancy, but was positively aflame
with curiosity himself.
"A capital idea!" he said, with the utmost satisfaction. "We'll have a look
at the crocodile! On the eve of visiting Europe it is as well to acquaint
ourselves on the spot with its indigenous inhabitants." And with these
words, taking his wife's arm, he set off with her at once for the Arcade. I
joined them, as I usually do, being an intimate friend of the family. I
have never seen Ivan Matveitch in a more agreeable frame of mind than he
was on that memorable morning--how true it is that we know not beforehand
the fate that awaits us! On entering the Arcade he was at once full of
admiration for the splendours of the building, and when we reached the shop
in which the monster lately arrived in Petersburg was being exhibited, he
volunteered to pay the quarter-rouble for me to the crocodile owner--a
thing which had never happened before. Walking into a little room, we
observed that besides the crocodile there were in it parrots of the species
known as cockatoo, and also a group of monkeys in a special case in a
recess. Near the entrance, along the left wall stood a big tin tank that
looked like a bath covered with a thin iron grating, filled with water to
the depth of two inches. In this shallow pool was kept a huge crocodile,
which lay like a log absolutely motionless and apparently deprived of all
its faculties by our damp climate, so inhospitable to foreign visitors.
This monster at first aroused no special interest in any one of us.
"So this is the crocodile!" said Elena Ivanovna, with a pathetic cadence of
regret. "Why, I thought it was ... something different."
Most probably she thought it was made of diamonds. The owner of the
crocodile, a German, came out and looked at us with an air of extraordinary
pride.
"He has a right to be," Ivan Matveitch whispered to me, "he knows he is the
only man in Russia exhibiting a crocodile."
This quite nonsensical observation I ascribe also to the extremely
good-humoured mood which had overtaken Ivan Matveitch, who was on other
occasions of rather envious disposition.
"I fancy your crocodile is not alive," said Elena Ivanovna, piqued by the
irresponsive stolidity of the proprietor, and addressing him with a
charming smile in order to soften his churlishness--a manoeuvre so
typically feminine.
"Oh, no, madam," the latter replied in broken Russian; and instantly
moving the grating half off the tank, he poked the monster's head with a
stick.
Then the treacherous monster, to show that it was alive, faintly stirred
its paws and tail, raised its snout and emitted something like a prolonged
snuffle.
"Come, don't be cross, Karlchen," said the German caressingly, gratified in
his vanity.
"How horrid that crocodile is! I am really frightened," Elena Ivanovna
twittered, still more coquettishly. "I know I shall dream of him now."
"But he won't bite you if you do dream of him," the German retorted
gallantly, and was the first to laugh at his own jest, but none of us
responded.
"Come, Semyon Semyonitch," said Elena Ivanovna, addressing me exclusively,
"let us go and look at the monkeys. I am awfully fond of monkeys; they are
such darlings ... and the crocodile is horrid."
"Oh, don't be afraid, my dear!" Ivan Matveitch called after us, gallantly
displaying his manly courage to his wife. "This drowsy denison of the
realms of the Pharaohs will do us no harm." And he remained by the tank.
What is more, he took his glove and began tickling the crocodile's nose
with it, wishing, as he said afterwards, to induce him to snort. The
proprietor showed his politeness to a lady by following Elena Ivanovna to
the case of monkeys.
So everything was going well, and nothing could have been foreseen. Elena
Ivanovna was quite skittish in her raptures over the monkeys, and seemed
completely taken up with them. With shrieks of delight she was continually
turning to me, as though determined not to notice the proprietor, and kept
gushing with laughter at the resemblance she detected between these monkeys
and her intimate friends and acquaintances. I, too, was amused, for the
resemblance was unmistakable. The German did not know whether to laugh or
not, and so at last was reduced to frowning. And it was at that moment
that a terrible, I may say unnatural, scream set the room vibrating. Not
knowing what to think, for the first moment I stood still, numb with
horror, but noticing that Elena Ivanovna was screaming too, I quickly
turned round--and what did I behold! I saw--oh, heavens!--I saw the
luckless Ivan Matveitch in the terrible jaws of the crocodile, held by them
round the waist, lifted horizontally in the air and desperately kicking.
Then--one moment, and no trace remained of him. But I must describe it in
detail, for I stood all the while motionless, and had time to watch the
whole process taking place before me with an attention and interest such as
I never remember to have felt before. "What," I thought at that critical
moment, "what if all that had happened to me instead of to Ivan
Matveitch--how unpleasant it would have been for me!"
But to return to my story. The crocodile began by turning the unhappy Ivan
Matveitch in his terrible jaws so that he could swallow his legs first;
then bringing up Ivan Matveitch, who kept trying to jump out and clutching
at the sides of the tank, sucked him down again as far as his waist. Then
bringing him up again, gulped him down, and so again and again. In this way
Ivan Matveitch was visibly disappearing before our eyes. At last, with a
final gulp, the crocodile swallowed my cultured friend entirely, this time
leaving no trace of him. From the outside of the crocodile we could see the
protuberances of Ivan Matveitch's figure as he passed down the inside of
the monster. I was on the point of screaming again when destiny played
another treacherous trick upon us. The crocodile made a tremendous effort,
probably oppressed by the magnitude of the object he had swallowed, once
more opened his terrible jaws, and with a final hiccup he suddenly let the
head of Ivan Matveitch pop out for a second, with an expression of despair
on his face. In that brief instant the spectacles dropped off his nose to
the bottom of the tank. It seemed as though that despairing countenance
had only popped out to cast one last look on the objects around it, to take
its last farewell of all earthly pleasures. But it had not time to carry
out its intention; the crocodile made another effort, gave a gulp and
instantly it vanished again--this time for ever. This appearance and
disappearance of a still living human head was so horrible, but at the
same--either from its rapidity and unexpectedness or from the dropping of
the spectacles--there was something so comic about it that I suddenly quite
unexpectedly exploded with laughter. But pulling myself together and
realising that to laugh at such a moment was not the thing for an old
family friend, I turned at once to Elena Ivanovna and said with a
sympathetic air:
"Now it's all over with our friend Ivan Matveitch!"
I cannot even attempt to describe how violent was the agitation of Elena
Ivanovna during the whole process. After the first scream she seemed rooted
to the spot, and stared at the catastrophe with apparent indifference,
though her eyes looked as though they were starting out of her head; then
she suddenly went off into a heart-rending wail, but I seized her hands. At
this instant the proprietor, too, who had at first been also petrified by
horror, suddenly clasped his hands and cried, gazing upwards:
"Oh my crocodile! _Oh mein allerliebster Karlchen! Mutter, Mutter,
Mutter!_"
A door at the rear of the room opened at this cry, and the _Mutter_, a
rosy-cheeked, elderly but dishevelled woman in a cap made her appearance,
and rushed with a shriek to her German.
A perfect Bedlam followed. Elena Ivanovna kept shrieking out the same
phrase, as though in a frenzy, "Flay him! flay him!" apparently entreating
them--probably in a moment of oblivion--to flay somebody for something. The
proprietor and _Mutter_ took no notice whatever of either of us; they were
both bellowing like calves over the crocodile.
"He did for himself! He will burst himself at once, for he did swallow a
_ganz_ official!" cried the proprietor.
"_Unser Karlchen, unser allerliebster Karlchen wird sterben_," howled his
wife.
"We are bereaved and without bread!" chimed in the proprietor.
"Flay him! flay him! flay him!" clamoured Elena Ivanovna, clutching at the
German's coat.
"He did tease the crocodile. For what did your man tease the crocodile?"
cried the German, pulling away from her. "You will if _Karlchen wird_
burst, therefore pay, _das war mein Sohn, das war mein einziger Sohn_."
I must own I was intensely indignant at the sight of such egoism in the
German and the cold-heartedness of his dishevelled _Mutter_; at the same
time Elena Ivanovna's reiterated shriek of "Flay him! flay him!" troubled
me even more and absorbed at last my whole attention, positively alarming
me. I may as well say straight off that I entirely misunderstood this
strange exclamation: it seemed to me that Elena Ivanovna had for the moment
taken leave of her senses, but nevertheless wishing to avenge the loss of
her beloved Ivan Matveitch, was demanding by way of compensation that the
crocodile should be severely thrashed, while she was meaning something
quite different. Looking round at the door, not without embarrassment, I
began to entreat Elena Ivanovna to calm herself, and above all not to use
the shocking word "flay." For such a reactionary desire here, in the midst
of the Arcade and of the most cultured society, not two paces from the hall
where at this very minute Mr. Lavrov was perhaps delivering a public
lecture, was not only impossible but unthinkable, and might at any moment
bring upon us the hisses of culture and the caricatures of Mr. Stepanov. To
my horror I was immediately proved to be correct in my alarmed suspicions:
the curtain that divided the crocodile room from the little entry where the
quarter-roubles were taken suddenly parted, and in the opening there
appeared a figure with moustaches and beard, carrying a cap, with the upper
part of its body bent a long way forward, though the feet were scrupulously
held beyond the threshold of the crocodile room in order to avoid the
necessity of paying the entrance money.
"Such a reactionary desire, madam," said the stranger, trying to avoid
falling over in our direction and to remain standing outside the room,
"does no credit to your development, and is conditioned by lack of
phosphorus in your brain. You will be promptly held up to shame in the
_Chronicle of Progress_ and in our satirical prints...."
But he could not complete his remarks; the proprietor coming to himself,
and seeing with horror that a man was talking in the crocodile room without
having paid entrance money, rushed furiously at the progressive stranger
and turned him out with a punch from each fist. For a moment both vanished
from our sight behind a curtain, and only then I grasped that the whole
uproar was about nothing. Elena Ivanovna turned out quite innocent; she
had, as I have mentioned already, no idea whatever of subjecting the
crocodile to a degrading corporal punishment, and had simply expressed the
desire that he should be opened and her husband released from his interior.
"What! You wish that my crocodile be perished!" the proprietor yelled,
running in again. "No! let your husband be perished first, before my
crocodile!... _Mein Vater_ showed crocodile, _mein Grossvater_ showed
crocodile, _mein Sohn_ will show crocodile, and I will show crocodile! All
will show crocodile! I am known to _ganz Europa_, and you are not known to
_ganz Europa_, and you must pay me a _strafe_!"
"_Ja, ja_," put in the vindictive German woman, "we shall not let you go.
_Strafe_, since Karlchen is burst!"
"And, indeed, it's useless to flay the creature," I added calmly, anxious
to get Elena Ivanovna away home as quickly as possible, "as our dear Ivan
Matveitch is by now probably soaring somewhere in the empyrean."
"My dear"--we suddenly heard, to our intense amazement, the voice of Ivan
Matveitch--"my dear, my advice is to apply direct to the superintendent's
office, as without the assistance of the police the German will never be
made to see reason."
These words, uttered with firmness and aplomb, and expressing an
exceptional presence of mind, for the first minute so astounded us that we
could not believe our ears. But, of course, we ran at once to the
crocodile's tank, and with equal reverence and incredulity listened to the
unhappy captive. His voice was muffled, thin and even squeaky, as though it
came from a considerable distance. It reminded one of a jocose person who,
covering his mouth with a pillow, shouts from an adjoining room, trying to
mimic the sound of two peasants calling to one another in a deserted plain
or across a wide ravine--a performance to which I once had the pleasure of
listening in a friend's house at Christmas.
"Ivan Matveitch, my dear, and so you are alive!" faltered Elena Ivanovna.
"Alive and well," answered Ivan Matveitch, "and, thanks to the Almighty,
swallowed without any damage whatever. I am only uneasy as to the view my
superiors may take of the incident; for after getting a permit to go abroad
I've got into a crocodile, which seems anything but clever."
"But, my dear, don't trouble your head about being clever; first of all we
must somehow excavate you from where you are," Elena Ivanovna interrupted.
"Excavate!" cried the proprietor. "I will not let my crocodile be
excavated. Now the _publicum_ will come many more, and I will _fünfzig_
kopecks ask and Karlchen will cease to burst."
"_Gott sei dank!_" put in his wife.
"They are right," Ivan Matveitch observed tranquilly; "the principles of
economics before everything."
"My dear! I will fly at once to the authorities and lodge a complaint, for
I feel that we cannot settle this mess by ourselves."
"I think so too," observed Ivan Matveitch; "but in our age of industrial
crisis it is not easy to rip open the belly of a crocodile without economic
compensation, and meanwhile the inevitable question presents itself: What
will the German take for his crocodile? And with it another: How will it be
paid? For, as you know, I have no means...."
"Perhaps out of your salary...." I observed timidly, but the proprietor
interrupted me at once.
"I will not the crocodile sell; I will for three thousand the crocodile
sell! I will for four thousand the crocodile sell! Now the _publicum_ will
come very many. I will for five thousand the crocodile sell!"
In fact he gave himself insufferable airs. Covetousness and a revolting
greed gleamed joyfully in his eyes.
"I am going!" I cried indignantly.
"And I! I too! I shall go to Andrey Osipitch himself. I will soften him
with my tears," whined Elena Ivanovna.
"Don't do that, my dear," Ivan Matveitch hastened to interpose. He had long
been jealous of Andrey Osipitch on his wife's account, and he knew she
would enjoy going to weep before a gentleman of refinement, for tears
suited her. "And I don't advise you to do so either, my friend," he added,
addressing me. "It's no good plunging headlong in that slap-dash way;
there's no knowing what it may lead to. You had much better go to-day to
Timofey Semyonitch, as though to pay an ordinary visit; he is an
old-fashioned and by no means brilliant man, but he is trustworthy, and
what matters most of all, he is straightforward. Give him my greetings and
describe the circumstances of the case. And since I owe him seven roubles
over our last game of cards, take the opportunity to pay him the money;
that will soften the stern old man. In any case his advice may serve as a
guide for us. And meanwhile take Elena Ivanovna home.... Calm yourself, my
dear," he continued, addressing her. "I am weary of these outcries and
feminine squabblings, and should like a nap. It's soft and warm in here,
though I have hardly had time to look round in this unexpected haven."
"Look round! Why, is it light in there?" cried Elena Ivanovna in a tone of
relief.
"I am surrounded by impenetrable night," answered the poor captive; "but I
can feel and, so to speak, have a look round with my hands.... Good-bye;
set your mind at rest and don't deny yourself recreation and diversion.
Till to-morrow! And you, Semyon Semyonitch, come to me in the evening, and
as you are absent-minded and may forget it, tie a knot in your
handkerchief."
I confess I was glad to get away, for I was overtired and somewhat bored.
Hastening to offer my arm to the disconsolate Elena Ivanovna, whose charms
were only enhanced by her agitation, I hurriedly led her out of the
crocodile room.
"The charge will be another quarter-rouble in the evening," the proprietor
called after us.
"Oh, dear, how greedy they are!" said Elena Ivanovna, looking at herself in
every mirror on the walls of the Arcade, and evidently aware that she was
looking prettier than usual.
"The principles of economics," I answered with some emotion, proud that
passers-by should see the lady on my arm.
"The principles of economics," she drawled in a touching little voice. "I
did not in the least understand what Ivan Matveitch said about those horrid
economics just now."
"I will explain to you," I answered, and began at once telling her of the
beneficial effects of the introduction of foreign capital into our country,
upon which I had read an article in the _Petersburg News_ and the _Voice_
that morning.
"How strange it is," she interrupted, after listening for some time. "But
do leave off, you horrid man. What nonsense you are talking.... Tell me, do
I look purple?"
"You look perfect, and not purple!" I observed, seizing the opportunity to
pay her a compliment.
"Naughty man!" she said complacently. "Poor Ivan Matveitch," she added a
minute later, putting her little head on one side coquettishly. "I am
really sorry for him. Oh, dear!" she cried suddenly, "how is he going to
have his dinner ... and ... and ... what will he do ... if he wants
anything?"
"An unforeseen question," I answered, perplexed in my turn. To tell the
truth, it had not entered my head, so much more practical are women than we
men in the solution of the problems of daily life!
"Poor dear! how could he have got into such a mess ... nothing to amuse
him, and in the dark.... How vexing it is that I have no photograph of
him.... And so now I am a sort of widow," she added, with a seductive
smile, evidently interested in her new position. "Hm!... I am sorry for
him, though."
It was, in short, the expression of the very natural and intelligible grief
of a young and interesting wife for the loss of her husband. I took her
home at last, soothed her, and after dining with her and drinking a cup of
aromatic coffee, set off at six o'clock to Timofey Semyonitch, calculating
that at that hour all married people of settled habits would be sitting or
lying down at home.
Having written this first chapter in a style appropriate to the incident
recorded, I intend to proceed in a language more natural though less
elevated, and I beg to forewarn the reader of the fact.
The venerable Timofey Semyonitch met me rather nervously, as though
somewhat embarrassed. He led me to his tiny study and shut the door
carefully, "that the children may not hinder us," he added with evident
uneasiness. There he made me sit down on a chair by the writing-table, sat
down himself in an easy chair, wrapped round him the skirts of his old
wadded dressing-gown, and assumed an official and even severe air, in
readiness for anything, though he was not my chief nor Ivan Matveitch's,
and had hitherto been reckoned as a colleague and even a friend.
"First of all," he said, "take note that I am not a person in authority,
but just such a subordinate official as you and Ivan Matveitch.... I have
nothing to do with it, and do not intend to mix myself up in the affair."
I was surprised to find that he apparently knew all about it already. In
spite of that I told him the whole story over in detail. I spoke with
positive excitement, for I was at that moment fulfilling the obligations of
a true friend. He listened without special surprise, but with evident signs
of suspicion.
"Only fancy," he said, "I always believed that this would be sure to happen
to him."
"Why, Timofey Semyonitch? It is a very unusual incident in itself...."
"I admit it. But Ivan Matveitch's whole career in the service was leading
up to this end. He was flighty--conceited indeed. It was always 'progress'
and ideas of all sorts, and this is what progress brings people to!"
"But this is a most unusual incident and cannot possibly serve as a general
rule for all progressives."
"Yes, indeed it can. You see, it's the effect of over-education, I assure
you. For over-education leads people to poke their noses into all sorts of
places, especially where they are not invited. Though perhaps you know
best," he added, as though offended. "I am an old man and not of much
education. I began as a soldier's son, and this year has been the jubilee
of my service."
"Oh, no, Timofey Semyonitch, not at all. On the contrary, Ivan Matveitch is
eager for your advice; he is eager for your guidance. He implores it, so to
say, with tears."
"So to say, with tears! Hm! Those are crocodile's tears and one cannot
quite believe in them. Tell me, what possessed him to want to go abroad?
And how could he afford to go? Why, he has no private means!"
"He had saved the money from his last bonus," I answered plaintively. "He
only wanted to go for three months--to Switzerland ... to the land of
William Tell."
"William Tell? Hm!"
"He wanted to meet the spring at Naples, to see the museums, the customs,
the animals...."
"Hm! The animals! I think it was simply from pride. What animals? Animals,
indeed! Haven't we animals enough? We have museums, menageries, camels.
There are bears quite close to Petersburg! And here he's got inside a
crocodile himself...."
"Oh, come, Timofey Semyonitch! The man is in trouble, the man appeals to
you as to a friend, as to an older relation, craves for advice--and you
reproach him. Have pity at least on the unfortunate Elena Ivanovna!"
"You are speaking of his wife? A charming little lady," said Timofey
Semyonitch, visibly softening and taking a pinch of snuff with relish.
"Particularly prepossessing. And so plump, and always putting her pretty
little head on one side.... Very agreeable. Andrey Osipitch was speaking of
her only the other day."
"Speaking of her?"
"Yes, and in very flattering terms. Such a bust, he said, such eyes, such
hair.... A sugar-plum, he said, not a lady--and then he laughed. He is
still a young man, of course." Timofey Semyonitch blew his nose with a loud
noise. "And yet, young though he is, what a career he is making for
himself."
"That's quite a different thing, Timofey Semyonitch."
"Of course, of course."
"Well, what do you say then, Timofey Semyonitch?"
"Why, what can I do?"
"Give advice, guidance, as a man of experience, a relative! What are we to
do? What steps are we to take? Go to the authorities and ..."
"To the authorities? Certainly not," Timofey Semyonitch replied hurriedly.
"If you ask my advice, you had better, above all, hush the matter up and
act, so to speak, as a private person. It is a suspicious incident, quite
unheard of. Unheard of, above all; there is no precedent for it, and it is
far from creditable.... And so discretion above all.... Let him lie there a
bit. We must wait and see...."
"But how can we wait and see, Timofey Semyonitch? What if he is stifled
there?"
"Why should he be? I think you told me that he made himself fairly
comfortable there?"
I told him the whole story over again. Timofey Semyonitch pondered.
"Hm!" he said, twisting his snuff-box in his hands. "To my mind it's really
a good thing he should lie there a bit, instead of going abroad. Let him
reflect at his leisure. Of course he mustn't be stifled, and so he must
take measures to preserve his health, avoiding a cough, for instance, and
so on.... And as for the German, it's my personal opinion he is within his
rights, and even more so than the other side, because it was the other
party who got into _his_ crocodile without asking permission, and not _he_
who got into Ivan Matveitch's crocodile without asking permission, though,
so far as I recollect, the latter has no crocodile. And a crocodile is
private property, and so it is impossible to slit him open without
compensation."
"For the saving of human life, Timofey Semyonitch."
"Oh, well, that's a matter for the police. You must go to them."
"But Ivan Matveitch may be needed in the department. He may be asked for."
"Ivan Matveitch needed? Ha-ha! Besides, he is on leave, so that we may
ignore him--let him inspect the countries of Europe! It will be a different
matter if he doesn't turn up when his leave is over. Then we shall ask for
him and make inquiries."
"Three months! Timofey Semyonitch, for pity's sake!"
"It's his own fault. Nobody thrust him there. At this rate we should have
to get a nurse to look after him at government expense, and that is not
allowed for in the regulations. But the chief point is that the crocodile
is private property, so that the principles of economics apply in this
question. And the principles of economics are paramount. Only the other
evening, at Luka Andreitch's, Ignaty Prokofyitch was saying so. Do you know
Ignaty Prokofyitch? A capitalist, in a big way of business, and he speaks
so fluently. 'We need industrial development,' he said; 'there is very
little development among us. We must create it. We must create capital, so
we must create a middle-class, the so-called bourgeoisie. And as we haven't
capital we must attract it from abroad. We must, in the first place, give
facilities to foreign companies to buy up lands in Russia as is done now
abroad. The communal holding of land is poison, is ruin.' And, you know, he
spoke with such heat; well, that's all right for him--a wealthy man, and
not in the service. 'With the communal system,' he said, 'there will be no
improvement in industrial development or agriculture. Foreign companies,'
he said, 'must as far as possible buy up the whole of our land in big lots,
and then split it up, split it up, split it up, in the smallest parts
possible'--and do you know he pronounced the words 'split it up' with such
determination--'and then sell it as private property. Or rather, not sell
it, but simply let it. When,' he said, 'all the land is in the hands of
foreign companies they can fix any rent they like. And so the peasant will
work three times as much for his daily bread and he can be turned out at
pleasure. So that he will feel it, will be submissive and industrious, and
will work three times as much for the same wages. But as it is, with the
commune, what does he care? He knows he won't die of hunger, so he is lazy
and drunken. And meanwhile money will be attracted into Russia, capital
will be created and the bourgeoisie will spring up. The English political
and literary paper, _The Times_, in an article the other day on our
finances stated that the reason our financial position was so
unsatisfactory was that we had no middle-class, no big fortunes, no
accommodating proletariat.' Ignaty Prokofyitch speaks well. He is an
orator. He wants to lay a report on the subject before the authorities, and
then to get it published in the _News_. That's something very different
from verses like Ivan Matveitch's...."
"But how about Ivan Matveitch?" I put in, after letting the old man babble
on.
Timofey Semyonitch was sometimes fond of talking and showing that he was
not behind the times, but knew all about things.
"How about Ivan Matveitch? Why, I am coming to that. Here we are, anxious
to bring foreign capital into the country--and only consider: as soon as
the capital of a foreigner, who has been attracted to Petersburg, has been
doubled through Ivan Matveitch, instead of protecting the foreign
capitalist, we are proposing to rip open the belly of his original
capital--the crocodile. Is it consistent? To my mind, Ivan Matveitch, as
the true son of his fatherland, ought to rejoice and to be proud that
through him the value of a foreign crocodile has been doubled and possibly
even trebled. That's just what is wanted to attract capital. If one man
succeeds, mind you, another will come with a crocodile, and a third will
bring two or three of them at once, and capital will grow up about
them--there you have a bourgeoisie. It must be encouraged."
"Upon my word, Timofey Semyonitch!" I cried, "you are demanding almost
supernatural self-sacrifice from poor Ivan Matveitch."
"I demand nothing, and I beg you, before everything--as I have said
already--to remember that I am not a person in authority and so cannot
demand anything of any one. I am speaking as a son of the fatherland, that
is, not as the _Son of the Fatherland_, but as a son of the fatherland.
Again, what possessed him to get into the crocodile? A respectable man, a
man of good grade in the service, lawfully married--and then to behave like
that! Is it consistent?"
"But it was an accident."
"Who knows? And where is the money to compensate the owner to come from?"
"Perhaps out of his salary, Timofey Semyonitch?"
"Would that be enough?"
"No, it wouldn't, Timofey Semyonitch," I answered sadly. "The proprietor
was at first alarmed that the crocodile would burst, but as soon as he was
sure that it was all right, he began to bluster and was delighted to think
that he could double the charge for entry."
"Treble and quadruple perhaps! The public will simply stampede the place
now, and crocodile owners are smart people. Besides, it's not Lent yet, and
people are keen on diversions, and so I say again, the great thing is that
Ivan Matveitch should preserve his incognito, don't let him be in a hurry.
Let everybody know, perhaps, that he is in the crocodile, but don't let
them be officially informed of it. Ivan Matveitch is in particularly
favourable circumstances for that, for he is reckoned to be abroad. It
will be said he is in the crocodile, and we will refuse to believe it. That
is how it can be managed. The great thing is that he should wait; and why
should he be in a hurry?"
"Well, but if ..."
"Don't worry, he has a good constitution...."
"Well, and afterwards, when he has waited?"
"Well, I won't conceal from you that the case is exceptional in the highest
degree. One doesn't know what to think of it, and the worst of it is there
is no precedent. If we had a precedent we might have something to go by.
But as it is, what is one to say? It will certainly take time to settle
it."
A happy thought flashed upon my mind.
"Cannot we arrange," I said, "that if he is destined to remain in the
entrails of the monster and it is the will of Providence that he should
remain alive, that he should send in a petition to be reckoned as still
serving?"
"Hm!... Possibly as on leave and without salary...."
"But couldn't it be with salary?"
"On what grounds?"
"As sent on a special commission."
"What commission and where?"
"Why, into the entrails, the entrails of the crocodile.... So to speak, for
exploration, for investigation of the facts on the spot. It would, of
course, be a novelty, but that is progressive and would at the same time
show zeal for enlightenment."
Timofey Semyonitch thought a little.
"To send a special official," he said at last, "to the inside of a
crocodile to conduct a special inquiry is, in my personal opinion, an
absurdity. It is not in the regulations. And what sort of special inquiry
could there be there?"
"The scientific study of nature on the spot, in the living subject. The
natural sciences are all the fashion nowadays, botany.... He could live
there and report his observations.... For instance, concerning digestion or
simply habits. For the sake of accumulating facts."
"You mean as statistics. Well, I am no great authority on that subject,
indeed I am no philosopher at all. You say 'facts'--we are overwhelmed with
facts as it is, and don't know what to do with them. Besides, statistics
are a danger."
"In what way?"
"They are a danger. Moreover, you will admit he will report facts, so to
speak, lying like a log. And, can one do one's official duties lying like a
log? That would be another novelty and a dangerous one; and again, there is
no precedent for it. If we had any sort of precedent for it, then, to my
thinking, he might have been given the job."
"But no live crocodiles have been brought over hitherto, Timofey
Semyonitch."
"Hm ... yes," he reflected again. "Your objection is a just one, if you
like, and might indeed serve as a ground for carrying the matter further;
but consider again, that if with the arrival of living crocodiles
government clerks begin to disappear, and then on the ground that they are
warm and comfortable there, expect to receive the official sanction for
their position, and then take their ease there ... you must admit it would
be a bad example. We should have every one trying to go the same way to get
a salary for nothing."
"Do your best for him, Timofey Semyonitch. By the way, Ivan Matveitch asked
me to give you seven roubles he had lost to you at cards."
"Ah, he lost that the other day at Nikifor Nikiforitch's. I remember. And
how gay and amusing he was--and now!"
The old man was genuinely touched.
"Intercede for him, Timofey Semyonitch!"
"I will do my best. I will speak in my own name, as a private person, as
though I were asking for information. And meanwhile, you find out
indirectly, unofficially, how much would the proprietor consent to take
for his crocodile?"
Timofey Semyonitch was visibly more friendly.
"Certainly," I answered. "And I will come back to you at once to report."
"And his wife ... is she alone now? Is she depressed?"
"You should call on her, Timofey Semyonitch."
"I will. I thought of doing so before; it's a good opportunity.... And what
on earth possessed him to go and look at the crocodile? Though, indeed, I
should like to see it myself."
"Go and see the poor fellow, Timofey Semyonitch."
"I will. Of course, I don't want to raise his hopes by doing so. I shall go
as a private person.... Well, good-bye, I am going to Nikifor Nikiforitch's
again: shall you be there?"
"No, I am going to see the poor prisoner."
"Yes, now he is a prisoner!... Ah, that's what comes of thoughtlessness!"
I said good-bye to the old man. Ideas of all kinds were straying through my
mind. A good-natured and most honest man, Timofey Semyonitch, yet, as I
left him, I felt pleased at the thought that he had celebrated his fiftieth
year of service, and that Timofey Semyonitchs are now a rarity among us. I
flew at once, of course, to the Arcade to tell poor Ivan Matveitch all the
news. And, indeed, I was moved by curiosity to know how he was getting on
in the crocodile and how it was possible to live in a crocodile. And,
indeed, was it possible to live in a crocodile at all? At times it really
seemed to me as though it were all an outlandish, monstrous dream,
especially as an outlandish monster was the chief figure in it.
And yet it was not a dream, but actual, indubitable fact. Should I be
telling the story if it were not? But to continue.
It was late, about nine o'clock, before I reached the Arcade, and I had to
go into the crocodile room by the back entrance, for the German had closed
the shop earlier than usual that evening. Now in the seclusion of
domesticity he was walking about in a greasy old frock-coat, but he seemed
three times as pleased as he had been in the morning. It was evidently that
he had no apprehensions now, and that the public had been coming "many
more." The _Mutter_ came out later, evidently to keep an eye on me. The
German and the _Mutter_ frequently whispered together. Although the shop
was closed he charged me a quarter-rouble! What unnecessary exactitude!
"You will every time pay; the public will one rouble, and you one quarter
pay; for you are the good friend of your good friend; and I a friend
respect...."
"Are you alive, are you alive, my cultured friend?" I cried, as I
approached the crocodile, expecting my words to reach Ivan Matveitch from a
distance and to flatter his vanity.
"Alive and well," he answered, as though from a long way off or from under
the bed, though I was standing close beside him. "Alive and well; but of
that later.... How are things going?"
As though purposely not hearing the question, I was just beginning with
sympathetic haste to question him how he was, what it was like in the
crocodile, and what, in fact, there was inside a crocodile. Both friendship
and common civility demanded this. But with capricious annoyance he
interrupted me.
"How are things going?" he shouted, in a shrill and on this occasion
particularly revolting voice, addressing me peremptorily as usual.
I described to him my whole conversation with Timofey Semyonitch down to
the smallest detail. As I told my story I tried to show my resentment in my
voice.
"The old man is right," Ivan Matveitch pronounced as abruptly as usual in
his conversation with me. "I like practical people, and can't endure
sentimental milk-sops. I am ready to admit, however, that your idea about a
special commission is not altogether absurd. I certainly have a great deal
to report, both from a scientific and from an ethical point of view. But
now all this has taken a new and unexpected aspect, and it is not worth
while to trouble about mere salary. Listen attentively. Are you sitting
down?"
"No, I am standing up."
"Sit down on the floor if there is nothing else, and listen attentively."
Resentfully I took a chair and put it down on the floor with a bang, in my
anger.
"Listen," he began dictatorially. "The public came to-day in masses. There
was no room left in the evening, and the police came in to keep order. At
eight o'clock, that is, earlier than usual, the proprietor thought it
necessary to close the shop and end the exhibition to count the money he
had taken and prepare for to-morrow more conveniently. So I know there will
be a regular fair to-morrow. So we may assume that all the most cultivated
people in the capital, the ladies of the best society, the foreign
ambassadors, the leading lawyers and so on, will all be present. What's
more, people will be flowing here from the remotest provinces of our vast
and interesting empire. The upshot of it is that I am the cynosure of all
eyes, and though hidden to sight, I am eminent. I shall teach the idle
crowd. Taught by experience, I shall be an example of greatness and
resignation to fate! I shall be, so to say, a pulpit from which to instruct
mankind. The mere biological details I can furnish about the monster I am
inhabiting are of priceless value. And so, far from repining at what has
happened, I confidently hope for the most brilliant of careers."
"You won't find it wearisome?" I asked sarcastically.
What irritated me more than anything was the extreme pomposity of his
language. Nevertheless, it all rather disconcerted me. "What on earth,
what, can this frivolous blockhead find to be so cocky about?" I muttered
to myself. "He ought to be crying instead of being cocky."
"No!" he answered my observation sharply, "for I am full of great ideas,
only now can I at leisure ponder over the amelioration of the lot of
humanity. Truth and light will come forth now from the crocodile. I shall
certainly develop a new economic theory of my own and I shall be proud of
it--which I have hitherto been prevented from doing by my official duties
and by trivial distractions. I shall refute everything and be a new
Fourier. By the way, did you give Timofey Semyonitch the seven roubles?"
"Yes, out of my own pocket," I answered, trying to emphasise that fact in
my voice.
"We will settle it," he answered superciliously. "I confidently expect my
salary to be raised, for who should get a raise if not I? I am of the
utmost service now. But to business. My wife?"
"You are, I suppose, inquiring after Elena Ivanovna?"
"My wife?" he shouted, this time in a positive squeal.
There was no help for it! Meekly, though gnashing my teeth, I told him how
I had left Elena Ivanovna. He did not even hear me out.
"I have special plans in regard to her," he began impatiently. "If I am
celebrated _here_, I wish her to be celebrated _there_. Savants, poets,
philosophers, foreign mineralogists, statesmen, after conversing in the
morning with me, will visit her _salon_ in the evening. From next week
onwards she must have an 'At Home' every evening. With my salary doubled,
we shall have the means for entertaining, and as the entertainment must not
go beyond tea and hired footmen--that's settled. Both here and there they
will talk of me. I have long thirsted for an opportunity for being talked
about, but could not attain it, fettered by my humble position and low
grade in the service. And now all this has been attained by a simple gulp
on the part of the crocodile. Every word of mine will be listened to, every
utterance will be thought over, repeated, printed. And I'll teach them what
I am worth! They shall understand at last what abilities they have allowed
to vanish in the entrails of a monster. 'This man might have been Foreign
Minister or might have ruled a kingdom,' some will say. 'And that man did
not rule a kingdom,' others will say. In what way am I inferior to a
Garnier-Pagesishky or whatever they are called? My wife must be a worthy
second--I have brains, she has beauty and charm. 'She is beautiful, and
that is why she is his wife,' some will say. 'She is beautiful _because_
she is his wife,' others will amend. To be ready for anything let Elena
Ivanovna buy to-morrow the Encyclopædia edited by Andrey Kraevsky, that she
may be able to converse on any topic. Above all, let her be sure to read
the political leader in the _Petersburg News_, comparing it every day with
the _Voice_. I imagine that the proprietor will consent to take me
sometimes with the crocodile to my wife's brilliant _salon_. I will be in a
tank in the middle of the magnificent drawing-room, and I will scintillate
with witticisms which I will prepare in the morning. To the statesmen I
will impart my projects; to the poet I will speak in rhyme; with the ladies
I can be amusing and charming without impropriety, since I shall be no
danger to their husbands' peace of mind. To all the rest I shall serve as a
pattern of resignation to fate and the will of Providence. I shall make my
wife a brilliant literary lady; I shall bring her forward and explain her
to the public; as my wife she must be full of the most striking virtues;
and if they are right in calling Andrey Alexandrovitch our Russian Alfred
de Musset, they will be still more right in calling her our Russian
Yevgenia Tour."
I must confess that although this wild nonsense was rather in Ivan
Matveitch's habitual style, it did occur to me that he was in a fever and
delirious. It was the same, everyday Ivan Matveitch, but magnified twenty
times.
"My friend," I asked him, "are you hoping for a long life? Tell me, in
fact, are you well? How do you eat, how do you sleep, how do you breathe? I
am your friend, and you must admit that the incident is most unnatural, and
consequently my curiosity is most natural."
"Idle curiosity and nothing else," he pronounced sententiously, "but you
shall be satisfied. You ask how I am managing in the entrails of the
monster? To begin with, the crocodile, to my amusement, turns out to be
perfectly empty. His inside consists of a sort of huge empty sack made of
gutta-percha, like the elastic goods sold in the Gorohovy Street, in the
Morskaya, and, if I am not mistaken, in the Voznesensky Prospect.
Otherwise, if you think of it, how could I find room?"
"Is it possible?" I cried, in a surprise that may well be understood. "Can
the crocodile be perfectly empty?"
"Perfectly," Ivan Matveitch maintained sternly and impressively. "And in
all probability, it is so constructed by the laws of Nature. The crocodile
possesses nothing but jaws furnished with sharp teeth, and besides the
jaws, a tail of considerable length--that is all, properly speaking. The
middle part between these two extremities is an empty space enclosed by
something of the nature of gutta-percha, probably really gutta-percha."
"But the ribs, the stomach, the intestines, the liver, the heart?" I
interrupted quite angrily.
"There is nothing, absolutely nothing of all that, and probably there never
has been. All that is the idle fancy of frivolous travellers. As one
inflates an air-cushion, I am now with my person inflating the crocodile.
He is incredibly elastic. Indeed, you might, as the friend of the family,
get in with me if you were generous and self-sacrificing enough--and even
with you here there would be room to spare. I even think that in the last
resort I might send for Elena Ivanovna. However, this void, hollow
formation of the crocodile is quite in keeping with the teachings of
natural science. If, for instance, one had to construct a new crocodile,
the question would naturally present itself. What is the fundamental
characteristic of the crocodile? The answer is clear: to swallow human
beings. How is one, in constructing the crocodile, to secure that he should
swallow people? The answer is clearer still: construct him hollow. It was
settled by physics long ago that Nature abhors a vacuum. Hence the inside
of the crocodile must be hollow so that it may abhor the vacuum, and
consequently swallow and so fill itself with anything it can come across.
And that is the sole rational cause why every crocodile swallows men. It is
not the same in the constitution of man: the emptier a man's head is, for
instance, the less he feels the thirst to fill it, and that is the one
exception to the general rule. It is all as clear as day to me now. I have
deduced it by my own observation and experience, being, so to say, in the
very bowels of Nature, in its retort, listening to the throbbing of its
pulse. Even etymology supports me, for the very word crocodile means
voracity. Crocodile--_crocodillo_--is evidently an Italian word, dating
perhaps from the Egyptian Pharaohs, and evidently derived from the French
verb _croquer_, which means to eat, to devour, in general to absorb
nourishment. All these remarks I intend to deliver as my first lecture in
Elena Ivanovna's _salon_ when they take me there in the tank."
"My friend, oughtn't you at least to take some purgative?" I cried
involuntarily.
"He is in a fever, a fever, he is feverish!" I repeated to myself in alarm.
"Nonsense!" he answered contemptuously. "Besides, in my present position it
would be most inconvenient. I knew, though, you would be sure to talk of
taking medicine."
"But, my friend, how ... how do you take food now? Have you dined to-day?"
"No, but I am not hungry, and most likely I shall never take food again.
And that, too, is quite natural; filling the whole interior of the
crocodile I make him feel always full. Now he need not be fed for some
years. On the other hand, nourished by me, he will naturally impart to me
all the vital juices of his body; it is the same as with some accomplished
coquettes who embed themselves and their whole persons for the night in raw
steak, and then, after their morning bath, are fresh, supple, buxom and
fascinating. In that way nourishing the crocodile, I myself obtain
nourishment from him, consequently we mutually nourish one another. But as
it is difficult even for a crocodile to digest a man like me, he must, no
doubt, be conscious of a certain weight in his stomach--an organ which he
does not, however, possess--and that is why, to avoid causing the creature
suffering, I do not often turn over, and although I could turn over I do
not do so from humanitarian motives. This is the one drawback of my present
position, and in an allegorical sense Timofey Semyonitch was right in
saying I was lying like a log. But I will prove that even lying like a
log--nay, that only lying like a log--one can revolutionise the lot of
mankind. All the great ideas and movements of our newspapers and magazines
have evidently been the work of men who were lying like logs; that is why
they call them divorced from the realities of life--but what does it
matter, their saying that! I am constructing now a complete system of my
own, and you wouldn't believe how easy it is! You have only to creep into a
secluded corner or into a crocodile, to shut your eyes, and you immediately
devise a perfect millennium for mankind. When you went away this afternoon
I set to work at once and have already invented three systems, now I am
preparing the fourth. It is true that at first one must refute everything
that has gone before, but from the crocodile it is so easy to refute it;
besides, it all becomes clearer, seen from the inside of the crocodile....
There are some drawbacks, though small ones, in my position, however; it is
somewhat damp here and covered with a sort of slime; moreover, there is a
smell of india-rubber like the smell of my old galoshes. That is all, there
are no other drawbacks."
"Ivan Matveitch," I interrupted, "all this is a miracle in which I can
scarcely believe. And can you, can you intend never to dine again?"
"What trivial nonsense you are troubling about, you thoughtless, frivolous
creature! I talk to you about great ideas, and you.... Understand that I am
sufficiently nourished by the great ideas which light up the darkness in
which I am enveloped. The good-natured proprietor has, however, after
consulting the kindly _Mutter_, decided with her that they will every
morning insert into the monster's jaws a bent metal tube, something like a
whistle pipe, by means of which I can absorb coffee or broth with bread
soaked in it. The pipe has already been bespoken in the neighbourhood, but
I think this is superfluous luxury. I hope to live at least a thousand
years, if it is true that crocodiles live so long, which, by the way--good
thing I thought of it--you had better look up in some natural history
to-morrow and tell me, for I may have been mistaken and have mixed it up
with some excavated monster. There is only one reflection rather troubles
me: as I am dressed in cloth and have boots on, the crocodile can obviously
not digest me. Besides, I am alive, and so am opposing the process of
digestion with my whole will power; for you can understand that I do not
wish to be turned into what all nourishment turns into, for that would be
too humiliating for me. But there is one thing I am afraid of: in a
thousand years the cloth of my coat, unfortunately of Russian make, may
decay, and then, left without clothing, I might perhaps, in spite of my
indignation, begin to be digested; and though by day nothing would induce
me to allow it, at night, in my sleep, when a man's will deserts him, I may
be overtaken by the humiliating destiny of a potato, a pancake, or veal.
Such an idea reduces me to fury. This alone is an argument for the revision
of the tariff and the encouragement of the importation of English cloth,
which is stronger and so will withstand Nature longer when one is swallowed
by a crocodile. At the first opportunity I will impart this idea to some
statesman and at the same time to the political writers on our Petersburg
dailies. Let them publish it abroad. I trust this will not be the only idea
they will borrow from me. I foresee that every morning a regular crowd of
them, provided with quarter-roubles from the editorial office, will be
flocking round me to seize my ideas on the telegrams of the previous day.
In brief, the future presents itself to me in the rosiest light."
"Fever, fever!" I whispered to myself.
"My friend, and freedom?" I asked, wishing to learn his views thoroughly.
"You are, so to speak, in prison, while every man has a right to the
enjoyment of freedom."
"You are a fool," he answered. "Savages love independence, wise men love
order; and if there is no order...."
"Ivan Matveitch, spare me, please!"
"Hold your tongue and listen!" he squealed, vexed at my interrupting him.
"Never has my spirit soared as now. In my narrow refuge there is only one
thing that I dread--the literary criticisms of the monthlies and the hiss
of our satirical papers. I am afraid that thoughtless visitors, stupid and
envious people and nihilists in general, may turn me into ridicule. But I
will take measures. I am impatiently awaiting the response of the public
to-morrow, and especially the opinion of the newspapers. You must tell me
about the papers to-morrow."
"Very good; to-morrow I will bring a perfect pile of papers with me."
"To-morrow it is too soon to expect reports in the newspapers, for it will
take four days for it to be advertised. But from to-day come to me every
evening by the back way through the yard. I am intending to employ you as
my secretary. You shall read the newspapers and magazines to me, and I will
dictate to you my ideas and give you commissions. Be particularly careful
not to forget the foreign telegrams. Let all the European telegrams be here
every day. But enough; most likely you are sleepy by now. Go home, and do
not think of what I said just now about criticisms: I am not afraid of it,
for the critics themselves are in a critical position. One has only to be
wise and virtuous and one will certainly get on to a pedestal. If not
Socrates, then Diogenes, or perhaps both of them together--that is my
future rôle among mankind."
So frivolously and boastfully did Ivan Matveitch hasten to express himself
before me, like feverish weak-willed women who, as we are told by the
proverb, cannot keep a secret. All that he told me about the crocodile
struck me as most suspicious. How was it possible that the crocodile was
absolutely hollow? I don't mind betting that he was bragging from vanity
and partly to humiliate me. It is true that he was an invalid and one must
make allowances for invalids; but I must frankly confess, I never could
endure Ivan Matveitch. I have been trying all my life, from a child up, to
escape from his tutelage and have not been able to! A thousand times over I
have been tempted to break with him altogether, and every time I have been
drawn to him again, as though I were still hoping to prove something to him
or to revenge myself on him. A strange thing, this friendship! I can
positively assert that nine-tenths of my friendship for him was made up of
malice. On this occasion, however, we parted with genuine feeling.
"Your friend a very clever man!" the German said to me in an undertone as
he moved to see me out; he had been listening all the time attentively to
our conversation.
"_À propos_," I said, "while I think of it: how much would you ask for your
crocodile in case any one wanted to buy it?"
Ivan Matveitch, who heard the question, was waiting with curiosity for the
answer; it was evident that he did not want the German to ask too little;
anyway, he cleared his throat in a peculiar way on hearing my question.
At first the German would not listen--was positively angry.
"No one will dare my own crocodile to buy!" he cried furiously, and turned
as red as a boiled lobster. "Me not want to sell the crocodile! I would not
for the crocodile a million thalers take. I took a hundred and thirty
thalers from the public to-day, and I shall to-morrow ten thousand take,
and then a hundred thousand every day I shall take. I will not him sell."
Ivan Matveitch positively chuckled with satisfaction. Controlling
myself--for I felt it was a duty to my friend--I hinted coolly and
reasonably to the crazy German that his calculations were not quite
correct, that if he makes a hundred thousand every day, all Petersburg will
have visited him in four days, and then there will be no one left to bring
him roubles, that life and death are in God's hands, that the crocodile may
burst or Ivan Matveitch may fall ill and die, and so on and so on.
The German grew pensive.
"I will him drops from the chemist's get," he said, after pondering, "and
will save your friend that he die not."
"Drops are all very well," I answered, "but consider, too, that the thing
may get into the law courts. Ivan Matveitch's wife may demand the
restitution of her lawful spouse. You are intending to get rich, but do you
intend to give Elena Ivanovna a pension?"
"No, me not intend," said the German in stern decision.
"No, we not intend," said the _Mutter_, with positive malignancy.
"And so would it not be better for you to accept something now, at once, a
secure and solid though moderate sum, than to leave things to chance? I
ought to tell you that I am inquiring simply from curiosity."
The German drew the _Mutter_ aside to consult with her in a corner where
there stood a case with the largest and ugliest monkey of his collection.
"Well, you will see!" said Ivan Matveitch.
As for me, I was at that moment burning with the desire, first, to give the
German a thrashing, next, to give the _Mutter_ an even sounder one, and,
thirdly, to give Ivan Matveitch the soundest thrashing of all for his
boundless vanity. But all this paled beside the answer of the rapacious
German.
After consultation with the _Mutter_ he demanded for his crocodile fifty
thousand roubles in bonds of the last Russian loan with lottery voucher
attached, a brick house in Gorohovy Street with a chemist's shop attached,
and in addition the rank of Russian colonel.
"You see!" Ivan Matveitch cried triumphantly. "I told you so! Apart from
this last senseless desire for the rank of a colonel, he is perfectly
right, for he fully understands the present value of the monster he is
exhibiting. The economic principle before everything!"
"Upon my word!" I cried furiously to the German. "But what should you be
made a colonel for? What exploit have you performed? What service have you
done? In what way have you gained military glory? You are really crazy!"
"Crazy!" cried the German, offended. "No, a person very sensible, but you
very stupid! I have a colonel deserved for that I have a crocodile shown
and in him a live _hofrath_ sitting! And a Russian can a crocodile not show
and a live _hofrath_ in him sitting! Me extremely clever man and much wish
colonel to be!"
"Well, good-bye, then, Ivan Matveitch!" I cried, shaking with fury, and I
went out of the crocodile room almost at a run.
I felt that in another minute I could not have answered for myself. The
unnatural expectations of these two block-heads were insupportable. The
cold air refreshed me and somewhat moderated my indignation. At last, after
spitting vigorously fifteen times on each side, I took a cab, got home,
undressed and flung myself into bed. What vexed me more than anything was
my having become his secretary. Now I was to die of boredom there every
evening, doing the duty of a true friend! I was ready to beat myself for
it, and I did, in fact, after putting out the candle and pulling up the
bedclothes, punch myself several times on the head and various parts of my
body. That somewhat relieved me, and at last I fell asleep fairly soundly,
in fact, for I was very tired. All night long I could dream of nothing but
monkeys, but towards morning I dreamt of Elena Ivanovna.
The monkeys I dreamed about, I surmise, because they were shut up in the
case at the German's; but Elena Ivanovna was a different story.
I may as well say at once, I loved the lady, but I make
haste--post-haste--to make a qualification. I loved her as a father,
neither more nor less. I judge that because I often felt an irresistible
desire to kiss her little head or her rosy cheek. And though I never
carried out this inclination, I would not have refused even to kiss her
lips. And not merely her lips, but her teeth, which always gleamed so
charmingly like two rows of pretty, well-matched pearls when she laughed.
She laughed extraordinarily often. Ivan Matveitch in demonstrative moments
used to call her his "darling absurdity"--a name extremely happy and
appropriate. She was a perfect sugar-plum, and that was all one could say
of her. Therefore I am utterly at a loss to understand what possessed Ivan
Matveitch to imagine his wife as a Russian Yevgenia Tour? Anyway, my dream,
with the exception of the monkeys, left a most pleasant impression upon me,
and going over all the incidents of the previous day as I drank my morning
cup of tea, I resolved to go and see Elena Ivanovna at once on my way to
the office--which, indeed, I was bound to do as the friend of the family.
In a tiny little room out of the bedroom--the so-called little
drawing-room, though their big drawing-room was little too--Elena Ivanovna
was sitting, in some half-transparent morning wrapper, on a smart little
sofa before a little tea-table, drinking coffee out of a little cup in
which she was dipping a minute biscuit. She was ravishingly pretty, but
struck me as being at the same time rather pensive.
"Ah, that's you, naughty man!" she said, greeting me with an absent-minded
smile. "Sit down, feather-head, have some coffee. Well, what were you doing
yesterday? Were you at the masquerade?"
"Why, were you? I don't go, you know. Besides, yesterday I was visiting our
captive...." I sighed and assumed a pious expression as I took the coffee.
"Whom?... What captive?... Oh, yes! Poor fellow! Well, how is he--bored? Do
you know ... I wanted to ask you.... I suppose I can ask for a divorce
now?"
"A divorce!" I cried in indignation and almost spilled the coffee. "It's
that swarthy fellow," I thought to myself bitterly.
There was a certain swarthy gentleman with little moustaches who was
something in the architectural line, and who came far too often to see
them, and was extremely skilful in amusing Elena Ivanovna. I must confess
I hated him and there was no doubt that he had succeeded in seeing Elena
Ivanovna yesterday either at the masquerade or even here, and putting all
sorts of nonsense into her head.
"Why," Elena Ivanovna rattled off hurriedly, as though it were a lesson she
had learnt, "if he is going to stay on in the crocodile, perhaps not come
back all his life, while I sit waiting for him here! A husband ought to
live at home, and not in a crocodile...."
"But this was an unforeseen occurrence," I was beginning, in very
comprehensible agitation.
"Oh, no, don't talk to me, I won't listen, I won't listen," she cried,
suddenly getting quite cross. "You are always against me, you wretch!
There's no doing anything with you, you will never give me any advice!
Other people tell me that I can get a divorce because Ivan Matveitch will
not get his salary now."
"Elena Ivanovna! is it you I hear!" I exclaimed pathetically. "What villain
could have put such an idea into your head? And divorce on such a trivial
ground as a salary is quite impossible. And poor Ivan Matveitch, poor Ivan
Matveitch is, so to speak, burning with love for you even in the bowels of
the monster. What's more, he is melting away with love like a lump of
sugar. Yesterday while you were enjoying yourself at the masquerade, he was
saying that he might in the last resort send for you as his lawful spouse
to join him in the entrails of the monster, especially as it appears the
crocodile is exceedingly roomy, not only able to accommodate two but even
three persons...."
And then I told her all that interesting part of my conversation the night
before with Ivan Matveitch.
"What, what!" she cried, in surprise. "You want me to get into the monster
too, to be with Ivan Matveitch? What an idea! And how am I to get in there,
in my hat and crinoline? Heavens, what foolishness! And what should I look
like while I was getting into it, and very likely there would be some one
there to see me! It's absurd! And what should I have to eat there? And ...
and ... and what should I do there when.... Oh, my goodness, what will they
think of next?... And what should I have to amuse me there?... You say
there's a smell of gutta-percha? And what should I do if we
quarrelled--should we have to go on staying there side by side? Foo, how
horrid!"
"I agree, I agree with all those arguments, my sweet Elena Ivanovna," I
interrupted, striving to express myself with that natural enthusiasm which
always overtakes a man when he feels the truth is on his side. "But one
thing you have not appreciated in all this, you have not realised that he
cannot live without you if he is inviting you there; that is a proof of
love, passionate, faithful, ardent love.... You have thought too little of
his love, dear Elena Ivanovna!"
"I won't, I won't, I won't hear anything about it!" waving me off with her
pretty little hand with glistening pink nails that had just been washed and
polished. "Horrid man! You will reduce me to tears! Get into it yourself,
if you like the prospect. You are his friend, get in and keep him company,
and spend your life discussing some tedious science...."
"You are wrong to laugh at this suggestion"--I checked the frivolous woman
with dignity--"Ivan Matveitch has invited me as it is. You, of course, are
summoned there by duty; for me, it would be an act of generosity. But when
Ivan Matveitch described to me last night the elasticity of the crocodile,
he hinted very plainly that there would be room not only for you two, but
for me also as a friend of the family, especially if I wished to join you,
and therefore...."
"How so, the three of us?" cried Elena Ivanovna, looking at me in surprise.
"Why, how should we ... are we going to be all three there together?
Ha-ha-ha! How silly you both are! Ha-ha-ha! I shall certainly pinch you all
the time, you wretch! Ha-ha-ha! Ha-ha-ha!"
And falling back on the sofa, she laughed till she cried. All this--the
tears and the laughter--were so fascinating that I could not resist rushing
eagerly to kiss her hand, which she did not oppose, though she did pinch my
ears lightly as a sign of reconciliation.
Then we both grew very cheerful, and I described to her in detail all Ivan
Matveitch's plans. The thought of her evening receptions and her _salon_
pleased her very much.
"Only I should need a great many new dresses," she observed, "and so Ivan
Matveitch must send me as much of his salary as possible and as soon as
possible. Only ... only I don't know about that," she added thoughtfully.
"How can he be brought here in the tank? That's very absurd. I don't want
my husband to be carried about in a tank. I should feel quite ashamed for
my visitors to see it.... I don't want that, no, I don't."
"By the way, while I think of it, was Timofey Semyonitch here yesterday?"
"Oh, yes, he was; he came to comfort me, and do you know, we played cards
all the time. He played for sweet-meats, and if I lost he was to kiss my
hands. What a wretch he is! And only fancy, he almost came to the
masquerade with me, really!"
"He was carried away by his feelings!" I observed. "And who would not be
with you, you charmer?"
"Oh, get along with your compliments! Stay, I'll give you a pinch as a
parting present. I've learnt to pinch awfully well lately. Well, what do
you say to that? By the way, you say Ivan Matveitch spoke several times of
me yesterday?"
"N-no, not exactly.... I must say he is thinking more now of the fate of
humanity, and wants...."
"Oh, let him! You needn't go on! I am sure it's fearfully boring. I'll go
and see him some time. I shall certainly go to-morrow. Only not to-day;
I've got a headache, and besides, there will be such a lot of people there
to-day.... They'll say, 'That's his wife,' and I shall feel ashamed....
Good-bye. You will be ... there this evening, won't you?"
"To see him, yes. He asked me to go and take him the papers."
"That's capital. Go and read to him. But don't come and see me to-day. I am
not well, and perhaps I may go and see some one. Good-bye, you naughty
man."
"It's that swarthy fellow is going to see her this evening," I thought.
At the office, of course, I gave no sign of being consumed by these cares
and anxieties. But soon I noticed some of the most progressive papers
seemed to be passing particularly rapidly from hand to hand among my
colleagues, and were being read with an extremely serious expression of
face. The first one that reached me was the _News-sheet_, a paper of no
particular party but humanitarian in general, for which it was regarded
with contempt among us, though it was read. Not without surprise I read in
it the following paragraph:
"Yesterday strange rumours were circulating among the spacious ways and
sumptuous buildings of our vast metropolis. A certain well-known
_bon-vivant_ of the highest society, probably weary of the _cuisine_ at
Borel's and at the X. Club, went into the Arcade, into the place where an
immense crocodile recently brought to the metropolis is being exhibited,
and insisted on its being prepared for his dinner. After bargaining with
the proprietor he at once set to work to devour him (that is, not the
proprietor, a very meek and punctilious German, but his crocodile), cutting
juicy morsels with his penknife from the living animal, and swallowing them
with extraordinary rapidity. By degrees the whole crocodile disappeared
into the vast recesses of his stomach, so that he was even on the point of
attacking an ichneumon, a constant companion of the crocodile, probably
imagining that the latter would be as savoury. We are by no means opposed
to that new article of diet with which foreign _gourmands_ have long been
familiar. We have, indeed, predicted that it would come. English lords and
travellers make up regular parties for catching crocodiles in Egypt, and
consume the back of the monster cooked like beefsteak, with mustard, onions
and potatoes. The French who followed in the train of Lesseps prefer the
paws baked-in hot ashes, which they do, however, in opposition to the
English, who laugh at them. Probably both ways would be appreciated among
us. For our part, we are delighted at a new branch of industry, of which
our great and varied fatherland stands pre-eminently in need. Probably
before a year is out crocodiles will be brought in hundreds to replace this
first one, lost in the stomach of a Petersburg _gourmand_. And why should
not the crocodile be acclimatised among us in Russia? If the water of the
Neva is too cold for these interesting strangers, there are ponds in the
capital and rivers and lakes outside it. Why not breed crocodiles at
Pargolovo, for instance, or at Pavlovsk, in the Presnensky Ponds and in
Samoteka in Moscow? While providing agreeable, wholesome nourishment for
our fastidious _gourmands_, they might at the same time entertain the
ladies who walk about these ponds and instruct the children in natural
history. The crocodile skin might be used for making jewel-cases, boxes,
cigar-cases, pocket-books, and possibly more than one thousand saved up in
the greasy notes that are peculiarly beloved of merchants might be laid by
in crocodile skin. We hope to return more than once to this interesting
topic."
Though I had foreseen something of the sort, yet the reckless inaccuracy of
the paragraph overwhelmed me. Finding no one with whom to share my
impression, I turned to Prohor Savvitch who was sitting opposite to me, and
noticed that the latter had been watching me for some time, while in his
hand he held the _Voice_ as though he were on the point of passing it to
me. Without a word he took the _News-sheet_ from me, and as he handed me
the _Voice_ he drew a line with his nail against an article to which he
probably wished to call my attention. This Prohor Savvitch was a very queer
man: a taciturn old bachelor, he was not on intimate terms with any of us,
scarcely spoke to any one in the office, always had an opinion of his own
about everything, but could not bear to import it to any one. He lived
alone. Hardly any one among us had ever been in his lodging.
This was what I read in the _Voice_.
"Every one knows that we are progressive and humanitarian and want to be on
a level with Europe in this respect. But in spite of all our exertions and
the efforts of our paper we are still far from maturity, as may be judged
from the shocking incident which took place yesterday in the Arcade and
which we predicted long ago. A foreigner arrives in the capital bringing
with him a crocodile which he begins exhibiting in the Arcade. We
immediately hasten to welcome a new branch of useful industry such as our
powerful and varied fatherland stands in great need of. Suddenly yesterday
at four o'clock in the afternoon a gentleman of exceptional stoutness
enters the foreigner's shop in an intoxicated condition, pays his entrance
money, and immediately without any warning leaps into the jaws of the
crocodile, who was forced, of course, to swallow him, if only from an
instinct of self-preservation, to avoid being crushed. Tumbling into the
inside of the crocodile, the stranger at once dropped asleep. Neither the
shouts of the foreign proprietor, nor the lamentations of his terrified
family, nor threats to send for the police made the slightest impression.
Within the crocodile was heard nothing but laughter and a promise to flay
him (_sic_), though the poor mammal, compelled to swallow such a mass, was
vainly shedding tears. An uninvited guest is worse than a Tartar. But in
spite of the proverb the insolent visitor would not leave. We do not know
how to explain such barbarous incidents which prove our lack of culture
and disgrace us in the eyes of foreigners. The recklessness of the Russian
temperament has found a fresh outlet. It may be asked what was the object
of the uninvited visitor? A warm and comfortable abode? But there are many
excellent houses in the capital with very cheap and comfortable lodgings,
with the Neva water laid on, and a staircase lighted by gas, frequently
with a hall-porter maintained by the proprietor. We would call our readers'
attention to the barbarous treatment of domestic animals: it is difficult,
of course, for the crocodile to digest such a mass all at once, and now he
lies swollen out to the size of a mountain, awaiting death in insufferable
agonies. In Europe persons guilty of inhumanity towards domestic animals
have long been punished by law. But in spite of our European enlightenment,
in spite of our European pavements, in spite of the European architecture
of our houses, we are still far from shaking off our time-honoured
traditions.
"Though the houses are new, the conventions are old."
And, indeed, the houses are not new, at least the staircases in them are
not. We have more than once in our paper alluded to the fact that in the
Petersburg Side in the house of the merchant Lukyanov the steps of the
wooden staircase have decayed, fallen away, and have long been a danger for
Afimya Skapidarov, a soldier's wife who works in the house, and is often
obliged to go up the stairs with water or armfuls of wood. At last our
predictions have come true: yesterday evening at half-past eight Afimya
Skapidarov fell down with a basin of soup and broke her leg. We do not know
whether Lukyanov will mend his staircase now, Russians are often wise after
the event, but the victim of Russian carelessness has by now been taken to
the hospital. In the same way we shall never cease to maintain that the
house-porters who clear away the mud from the wooden pavement in the
Viborgsky Side ought not to spatter the legs of passers-by, but should
throw the mud up into heaps as is done in Europe," and so on, and so on.
"What's this?" I asked in some perplexity, looking at Prohor Savvitch.
"What's the meaning of it?"
"How do you mean?"
"Why, upon my word! Instead of pitying Ivan Matveitch, they pity the
crocodile!"
"What of it? They have pity even for a beast, a _mammal_. We must be up to
Europe, mustn't we? They have a very warm feeling for crocodiles there too.
He-he-he!"
Saying this, queer old Prohor Savvitch dived into his papers and would not
utter another word.
I stuffed the _Voice_ and the _News-sheet_ into my pocket and collected as
many old copies of the newspapers as I could find for Ivan Matveitch's
diversion in the evening, and though the evening was far off, yet on this
occasion I slipped away from the office early to go to the Arcade and look,
if only from a distance, at what was going on there, and to listen to the
various remarks and currents of opinion. I foresaw that there would be a
regular crush there, and turned up the collar of my coat to meet it. I
somehow felt rather shy--so unaccustomed are we to publicity. But I feel
that I have no right to report my own prosaic feelings when faced with this
remarkable and original incident.
