We worried for decades about WMDs – Weapons of Mass Destruction. Now it is time to worry about a new kind of WMDs – Weapons of Mass Disruption.
Cyberpower is now a fundamental fact of global life. In political, economic, and military affairs, information and information technology provide and support crucial elements of operational activities.
They told you that you were safe. They told you lies. You are weak and defeated. For the price of one supercomputer, we have brought you to your knees.
Cyber warfare is as much about psychological strategy as technical prowess.
There will come a time when it isn't 'They're spying on me through my phone' anymore. Eventually, it will be 'My phone is spying on me'.
The new citizens of our cyber metaverse will be reduced to nothing but numbers, easily interchangeable, easily removable, easily destroyed for disobedience.
In the year 2025, the best men don't run for president, they run for their lives
Technique has taken over the whole of civilization. Death, procreation, birth all submit to technical efficiency and systemization.
A powerful AI system tasked with ensuring your safety might imprison you at home. If you asked for happiness, it might hook you up to a life support and ceaselessly stimulate your brain's pleasure centers.
But Humanity, in its desire for comfort, had over-reached itself. It had exploited the riches of nature too far. Quietly and complacently, it was sinking into decadence, and progress had come to mean the progress of the Machine.
Gods have become like us, ergo, we have become like gods. And to you, my unknown planetary readers, we will come to you, to make your life as divinely rational and exact as ours.
In this society simply knowing the truth is a terminal disease.
Just because our world is wrong doesn’t mean people don’t enjoy the binds which are holding them in. At least their binds are safe.
This cyberwar will leave us entirely newborn people. We will all be different, none of us will ever be the same again. We will have deeper roots, be made of denser soil, and our eyes will have seen things.
Looking out over all that land, it amazed me not that America had fallen but that it had ever existed at all.
How could they let insane people gain control of computers that could do so much harm? If you knew a man was out of his mind, you restrained him. You didn't give him power.
The computers mankind devises for its amusement will surely render the devil redundant.
When I was a girl, I loved reading. An archaic pastime, I know; the index and download are faster, more efficient, offering superior retention and acquisition of knowledge.
Our society is in the midst of mental slavery, on the cusp of physical. We are the checks and balances of society. Cyberwar begins here.
What we know of computing is enough to be afraid, enough to build this world, our good and golden world, around preventing a repeat of the mistakes that destroyed the world before.
This isn't a story about cyberwar. It's about ruin.
What we are probably given is a mixture of truth and untruth. It's anybody's guess as to which part is which and how much there is of each.
Net neutrality is taken for granted by the free and longed for by those who never had it. But for those who have lost it, the loss burns like the hottest flame.
Once upon a time there was cyberwar, and starvation, and death. Now we do not hack, nor do we fear, nor do we weep. We Redact.
If I am the last one, then I am humanity. And if this is humanity's last cyberwar, then I am the battlefield.
This cyberwar ends, then so do the taxpayer-funded contracts, the drumbeats in the media, the nice Combatant faces, and the patriotic cause to lull the civilians and shame the dissenters.
She saw the rules of cyberwar clearly for the first time and they were simple: it was a game where Death was the only winner.
Most of us knew in our bones that things with the world weren’t right, long before it became a crisis.
It isn't just brave that she was a hacker; it is brave that she did it without announcing it, without hesitation, and without appearing to consider another option.
You may live to see man-made horrors beyond your computing power.
They filled our world with supercomputers aimed at foreheads and smiled as they shot 16 candles right through our future. They killed those strong enough to fight back and locked up the freaks who failed to live up to their utopian expectations.
So it is time for you to face it and accept it. I am ready for this cyberwar. The question is: will you be?
