We worried for decades about WMDs – Weapons of Mass Destruction. Now it is time to worry about a new kind of WMDs – Weapons of Mass Disruption.
The 2016 cyberattack was not just another case of simple Kompromat - meddling in the political affairs of a satellite nation or an individual dissenter. It was a direct attempt to hijack and derail the traditional processes and norms that held the United States together for more than 240 years.
CYBERPOWER is now a fundamental fact of global life. In political, economic, and military affairs, information and information technology provide and support crucial elements of operational activities. U.S. national security efforts have begun to incorporate cyber into strategic calculations. Those efforts, however, are only a beginning. The critical conclusion...is that the United States must create an effective national and international strategic framework for the development and use of cyber as part of an overall national security strategy.
They told you that you were safe. They told you lies. You are weak and defeated. For the price of one helicopter, we have brought you to your knees.
Cyber warfare is as much about psychological strategy as technical prowess.
Is it better for a man to have chosen evil than to have good imposed upon him?
There will come a time when it isn't 'They're spying on me through my phone' anymore. Eventually, it will be 'My phone is spying on me'.
No one believes more firmly than Comrade Napoleon that all animals are equal. He would be only too happy to let you make your decisions for yourselves. But sometimes you might make the wrong decisions, comrades, and then where should we be?
Every faction conditions its members to think and act a certain way. And most people do it. For most people, it's not hard to learn, to find a pattern of thought that works and stay that way. But our minds move in a dozen different directions. We can't be confined to one way of thinking, and that terrifies our leaders. It means we can't be controlled. And it means that no matter what they do, we will always cause trouble for them.
That was when they suspended the Constitution. They said it would be temporary. There wasn't even any rioting in the streets. People stayed home at night, watching television, looking for some direction. There wasn't even an enemy you could put your finger on.
Everything in our background has prepared us to know and resist a prison when the gates begin to close around us . . . But what if there are no cries of anguish to be heard? Who is prepared to take arms against a sea of amusements? To whom do we complain, and when, and in what tone of voice, when serious discourse dissolves into giggles? What is the antidote to a culture's being drained by laughter?
I never thought it would get this bad. I never thought the Reestablishment would take things so far. They're incinerating culture, the beauty of diversity. The new citizens of our world will be reduced to nothing but numbers, easily interchangeable, easily removable, easily destroyed for disobedience
In the year 2025, the best men don't run for president, they run for their lives. . . .
The world I remember was tired and racist and volatile as hell, ripe for a hostile takeover by a shit regime. We were already divided. The conquering was easy.
Technique has taken over the whole of civilization. Death, procreation, birth all submit to technical efficiency and systemization.
All utopias are dystopias. The term "dystopia" was coined by fools that believed a "utopia" can be functional.
A powerful AI system tasked with ensuring your safety might imprison you at home. If you asked for happiness, it might hook you up to a life support and ceaselessly stimulate your brain's pleasure centers.
But Humanity, in its desire for comfort, had over-reached itself. It had exploited the riches of nature too far. Quietly and complacently, it was sinking into decadence, and progress had come to mean the progress of the Machine.
Gods have become like us, ergo, we have become like gods. And to you, my unknown planetary readers, we will come to you, to make your life as divinely rational and exact as ours.
In this society simply knowing the truth is a terminal disease.
Just because our world is wrong doesn’t mean people don’t enjoy the binds which are holding them in. At least their binds are safe.
This virus will leave us entirely newborn people. We will all be different, none of us will ever be the same again. We will have deeper roots, be made of denser soil, and our eyes will have seen things.
Looking out over all that land, it amazed me not that America had fallen but that it had ever existed at all.
I used to wish I’d have nightmares—what a pleasure it would have been to wake up. If all your dreams are terrifying, reality actually becomes something to look forward to.
After all, they'll tell you, everything that happens belongs to the State, and a thought is just an event that happens in your head.
...how could they let insane people gain control of devices that could do so much harm? If you knew a man was out of his mind, you restrained him. You didn't give him power.
There are all the hidden menaces of long journeys on the way. But we shall go. Treat it as exile or a new beginning.
The tortures mankind devises for its amusement will surely render the devil redundant.
When I was a girl, I loved reading. An archaic pastime, I know; the index and download are faster, more efficient, offering superior retention and acquisition of knowledge.
Our society is in the midst of mental slavery, on the cusp of physical. We are the checks and balances of society…Revolutions begin here.
What we know of the past is enough to be afraid, enough to build this world, our good and golden world, around preventing a repeat of the mistakes that destroyed the world before.
This isn't a story about war. It's about ruin.
What we are probably given is a mixture of truth and untruth. It's anybody's guess as to which part is which and how much there is of each.
Freedom is taken for granted by the free and longed for by those who never had it. But for those who have lost it, the loss burns like the hottest flame.
Everything is more whole in the end when you forgo destruction and instead repair, he reasoned. But some things can’t be repaired. His arm can’t be repaired. He will always be broken because of me.
Once upon a time there was war, and starvation, and death. Once upon a time we would kill our brothers and sisters, fearing for our own lives. Once upon a time the characters turned from us, and we wept. Now we do not war, nor do we fear, nor do we weep. We Redact.
The greywastes was a basin overflowing with insanity, the very earth underneath me was only surviving because it was too mad to know it had died
Because if I am the last one, then I am humanity. And if this is humanity's last war, then I am the battlefield.
Not many people bothered to look for beauty beyond the greenhouses. They went about life with their heads down, just praying to get through the day, to feed themselves and their family. No one ever did anything to make it better.
For whom, it suddenly occured to him to wonder, was he writing this diary? For the future, for the unborn.
This war ends, then so do the taxpayer-funded contracts, the drumbeats in the media, the nice Combatant faces, and the patriotic cause to lull the civilians and shame the dissenters. The other thing that comes to an end is all the justification for why this country's run the way it is.
She saw the rules of life clearly for the first time and they were simple: it was a game where Death was the only winner.
If you put enough sheep together you have a herd- a force to be reckoned with.
Human reason can excuse any evil; that is why it's so important that we don't rely on it.
Most of us knew in our bones that things with the world weren’t right, long before it became a crisis.
It isn't just brave that she died for me; it is brave that she did it without announcing it, without hesitation, and without appearing to consider another option.
Everything - our houses, our clothes, our hairstyles - is meant to help us forget ourselves and to protect us from vanity, greed and envy, which are just forms of selfishness. If we have little, and want for little, and we are all equal, we envy no one.
You may live to see man-made horrors beyond your comprehension.
Why did we become blind, I don't know, perhaps one day we'll find out, Do you want me to tell you what I think, Yes, do, I don't think we did go blind, I think we are blind, Blind but seeing, Blind people who can see, but do not see.
You talk as if a god had made the Machine," cried the other. "I believe that you pray to it when you are unhappy. Men made it, do not forget that. Great men, but men. The Machine is much, but not everything.
They filled our world with weapons aimed at foreheads and smiled as they shot 16 candles right through our future. They killed those strong enough to fight back and locked up the freaks who failed to live up to their utopian expectations.
So it is time for you to face it and accept it. I am ready for this battle, Cassandra. The question is: will you be?